'\" e
.TH groff_diff @MAN7EXT@ "@MDATE@" "groff @VERSION@"
.SH Name
groff_diff \- differences between GNU
.I roff
and AT&T
.I troff
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Legal Terms
.\" ====================================================================
.\"
.\" Copyright 1989-2024 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
.\"           2019-2025 G. Branden Robinson
.\"
.\" This file is part of groff, the GNU roff typesetting system.
.\"
.\" Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
.\" document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
.\" Version 1.3 or any later version published by the Free Software
.\" Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts,
.\" and with no Back-Cover Texts.
.\"
.\" A copy of the Free Documentation License is included as a file
.\" called FDL in the main directory of the groff source package.
.
.
.\" Save and disable compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.do nr *groff_groff_diff_7_man_C \n[.cp]
.cp 0
.
.\" Define fallback for groff 1.23's MR macro if the system lacks it.
.nr do-fallback 0
.if !\n(.f           .nr do-fallback 1 \" mandoc
.if  \n(.g .if !d MR .nr do-fallback 1 \" older groff
.if !\n(.g           .nr do-fallback 1 \" non-groff *roff
.if \n[do-fallback]  \{\
.  de MR
.    ie \\n(.$=1 \
.      I \%\\$1
.    el \
.      IR \%\\$1 (\\$2)\\$3
.  .
.\}
.rr do-fallback
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.\" Local definitions
.\" ====================================================================
.
.\" define a string tx for the TeX logo
.ie t .ds tx T\h'-.1667m'\v'.224m'E\v'-.224m'\h'-.125m'X
.el   .ds tx TeX
.
.
.\" from old groff_out.man
.ie \n(.g \
.  ds ic \/
.el \
.  ds ic \^
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Description
.\" ====================================================================
.
The GNU
.I roff
text processing system,
.IR groff ,
is a reimplementation and extension of AT&T
.IR troff , \" AT&T
the typesetting system originating in Unix systems of the 1970s.
.
.I groff
removes many arbitrary limitations and adds features,
both to the input language and to the page description language output
by the
.I troff \" generic
formatter.
.
We also note here differences arising from
.IR groff 's
implementation of AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
features.
.
See
.MR roff @MAN7EXT@
for background.
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
can operate in a manner that increases support
for documents written for AT&T
.IR troff ; \" AT&T
see section \[lq]Compatibility mode\[rq] below.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Language
.\" ====================================================================
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
features identifiers of arbitrary length;
supports color output,
non-integral type sizes,
user-defined characters,
and automatic hyphenation of languages other than English;
adds more conditional expression operators;
recognizes additional scaling units and arithmetic operators;
enables general file I/O
(in \[lq]unsafe mode\[rq] only);
and exposes more formatter state.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Long names"
.\" ====================================================================
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
introduces many new requests;
with three exceptions
.RB ( cp ,
.BR do ,
.BR rj ),
they have names longer than two characters.
.
The names of registers,
fonts,
strings/\:macros/\:diversions,
environments,
special characters,
character classes,
streams,
hyphenation language codes,
and colors can be of any length.
.
Anywhere AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
supports a parameterized escape sequence that uses an opening
parenthesis \[lq](\[rq] to introduce a two-character argument,
.I groff
supports a square-bracketed form \[lq][]\[rq] where the argument
within can be of arbitrary length.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Font families, abstract styles, and translation"
.\" ====================================================================
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
can group text typefaces into
.I families.
For example,
.I groff
ships with support for families containing each of the styles
.RB \[lq] R \[rq],
.RB \[lq] I \[rq],
.RB \[lq] B \[rq],
and
.RB \[lq] BI \[rq]
(roman [upright],
bold,
italic [slanted],
and bold-italic).
.
So that a document need not be coupled to a specific font family,
an output device can associate a style in the abstract sense with a
mounting position.
.
Thus the default family can combine with a style dynamically,
producing a
.I "resolved font name."
.
A document can
.I translate,
or remap,
font names with the
.B ftr
request.
.
.
.P
Applying the requests
.BR cs ,
.BR bd ,
.BR tkf ,
.BR uf ,
or
.B \%fspecial
to an abstract style affects the member of the default family
corresponding to that style.
.
The default family can be set with the
.B fam
request or
.B \-f
command-line option.
.
The
.B styles
directive in the output device's
.I DESC
file controls which mounting positions
(if any)
are initially associated with abstract styles rather than fonts,
and the
.B sty
request can update this association.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Colors
.\" ====================================================================
.
.I groff
supports color output with a variety of color spaces and up to 16 bits
per channel.
.
Some devices,
particularly terminals,
may be more limited.
.
When color support is enabled,
two colors are current at any given time:
the
.I stroke color,
with which glyphs,
rules (lines),
and geometric figures are drawn,
and the
.I fill color,
which paints the interior of filled geometric figures.
.
The
.BR color ,
.BR \%defcolor ,
.BR gcolor ,
and
.B fcolor
requests;
.B \[rs]m
and
.B \[rs]M
escape sequences;
and
.BR .color ,
.BR .m ,
and
.B .M
registers exercise color support.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Hyphenation
.\" ====================================================================
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
uses a hyphenation algorithm and language-specific pattern files
(based on \*[tx]'s)
to decide which words can be hyphenated and where.
.
AT&T
.IR troff 's \" AT&T
hyphenation system (\[lq]suftab\[rq]) was specific to English.
.
.
.P
New requests permit finer control over hyphenation breaking;
hyphenation of a word might be suppressed due to a limit on consecutive
hyphenated lines
.RB ( hlm ),
a minimum line length threshold
.RB ( hym ),
or because the line can instead be adjusted with additional inter-word
space
.RB ( hys ).
.
The
.B hla
request selects a hyphenation language,
whereas
.B hpf
and
.B hpfa
respectively
load and append to the language's hyphenation patterns.
.
If no hyphenation language is set or no patterns are loaded,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
does not perform automatic hyphenation.
.
.
.\" BEGIN Keep (roughly) parallel with groff.texi node "Manipulating
.\" Hyphenation".
.P
For automatic hyphenation to work,
the formatter must know which letters are equivalent;
for example,
the letter \[lq]E\[rq] behaves like \[lq]e\[rq];
only the latter typically appears in hyphenation pattern files.
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
expects characters that participate in automatic hyphenation to be
assigned
.I "hyphenation codes"
that define these equivalence classes.
.
At startup,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
assigns hyphenation codes to the letters \[lq]a\[rq]\[en]\[lq]z\[rq],
applies the same codes to \[lq]A\[rq]\[en]\[lq]Z\[rq]
in one-to-one correspondence,
and assigns a code of zero to all other characters.
.
.
.br
.ne 2v
.P
The
.B hcode
request enables application of hyphenation codes
to characters outside the Unicode basic Latin set;
without doing so,
words containing such letters
won't hyphenate properly
even if the corresponding hyphenation patterns contain them.
.
Localization files for the input character set and language
configure hyphenation codes;
see
.MR groff_tmac @MAN5EXT@ .
.\" END Keep (roughly) parallel with groff.texi node "Manipulating
.\" Hyphenation".
.
.
.P
GNU
.IR troff 's \" GNU
.B \[rs]:
escape sequence works like
.B \[rs]%
but produces no hyphen if the word breaks at that location.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Fractional type sizes and new scaling units"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.\" BEGIN Keep (roughly) parallel with groff.texi node "Using Fractional
.\" Type Sizes".
When configuring the type size,
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
ignored scaling units and intepreted all measurements in points.
Combined with integer arithmetic,
this design choice made it impossible to support,
for instance,
ten-and-a-half-point type.
.
In GNU
.I troff \" GNU
an output device can select a scaling factor
that subdivides a point into \[lq]scaled points\[rq].
A type size expressed in scaled points
can thus represent a non-integral size in points.
.
.
.P
A
.I "scaled point,"
scaling unit
.BR s ,
is equal to
.RI 1/ sizescale
points,
where the device description file,
.IR DESC ,
specifies
.I sizescale
and otherwise defaults to\~1;
see
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@ .
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
also defines the
.I "typographical point,"
scaling unit
.BR z ,
which explicitly specifies a type size of potentially
non-integral measure.
The program multiplies typographical points by
.I sizescale
and converts the value to an integer.
.
Arguments GNU
.I troff \" GNU
interprets in
.B z
units by default comprise those to the escape sequences
.B \[rs]H
and
.BR \[rs]s ,
.\" Legacy forms of the `\s` escape sequence don't accept numerical
.\" expressions--only integers.
to the request
.BR ps ,
the third argument to the
.B cs
request,
and the second and fourth arguments to the
.B tkf
request.
.
In GNU
.IR troff , \" GNU
the register
.B \[rs]n[.s]
interpolates the type size in typographical points
.RB ( z ),
whereas the register
.B \[rs]n[.ps]
interpolates it in scaled points
.RB ( s ).
.
.RB \[lq] \[rs]n[.ps]s \[rq],
.RB \[lq] \[rs]n[.s]z \[rq],
and
.RB \[lq] 1m \[rq]
are co-equal by definition.
.
.
.P
For example,
if
.I sizescale
is\~1000,
then a scaled point is one thousandth of a point.
.
Consequently,
.RB \[lq] ".ps 10.5" \[rq]
is synonymous with
.RB \[lq] ".ps 10.5z" \[rq];
both set the type size to 10,500\~scaled points
or 10.5\~typographical points.
.
.
.P
It makes no sense to use the
.RB \[lq] z \[rq]\~scaling
unit in a numeric expression whose default scaling unit is neither
.RB \[lq] u \[rq]
.RB nor\~\[lq] z \[rq],
so GNU
.I troff \" GNU
disallows this.
.
Similarly,
it is nonsensical to use scaling units other than
.RB \[lq] p \[rq],
.RB \[lq] s \[rq],
.RB \[lq] z \[rq],
or
.RB \[lq] u \[rq],
in a numeric expression whose default scaling unit
.RB is\~\[lq] z \[rq],
and so GNU
.I troff \" GNU
disallows those as well.
.
.
.br
.ne 2v
.P
Output devices may be limited in the type sizes they can employ.
.
The
.B .s
and
.B .ps
registers represent the type size selected by the formatter
as it understands a device's capability.
.
the read-only registers
.B .psr
and
(string-valued)
.B .sr
interpolate the last
.I requested
in scaled points
and in points as a decimal fraction,
respectively.
.
Like the actual current and previous type size,
the requested ones are properties of an environment.
.
.
.P
For example,
if a document requests a type size of 10.95\~points,
and the nearest size permitted by a
.B sizes
request
(or by the
.B sizes
or
.B \%sizescale
directives in the device's
.I DESC
file)
is 11\~points,
.I groff
uses the latter value.
.\" END Keep (roughly) parallel with groff.texi node "Using Fractional
.\" Type Sizes".
.
.
.P
A further two new measurement units available in
.I groff
are
.RB \[lq] M \[rq],
which indicates hundredths of an em,
and
.RB \[lq] f \^\[rq],
which multiplies by 65,536.
.
The latter provides convenient fractions for color definitions with the
.B \%defcolor
request.
.
For example,
0.5f equals 32768u.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Special fonts"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.\" BEGIN Keep (roughly) parallel with groff.texi node "Special Fonts".
.\" (the second paragraph thereof; the first covers "portable" concepts)
GNU
.IR troff 's \" GNU
.RB \%\[lq] special \[rq]
and
.B \%fspecial
requests permit a document
to supplement the set of fonts the device configures
for glyph search
without having to use
the
.B fp
request to manipulate the list of mounting positions,
which can be tedious\[em]by default,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
mounts 40 fonts at startup
when using the
.B ps
device.
.\" END Keep (roughly) parallel with groff.texi node "Special Fonts".
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Numeric expressions"
.\" ====================================================================
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
permits spaces in a numeric expression within parentheses,
and offers three new operators.
.
.
.TP 8n \" "e1>?e2" +2n
.IB e1 >? e2
Interpolate the greater of expressions
.I e1
and
.IR e2 .
.
.
.TP
.IB e1 <? e2
Interpolate the lesser of expressions
.I e1
and
.IR e2 .
.
.
.TP
.BI ( c ; e )
Interpolate expression
.I e
using
.I c
as the default scaling unit,
ignoring scaling units in
.I e
if
.I c
is empty.
.
.
.P
Arithmetic in GNU
.I troff \" troff
saturates instead of wrapping.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Conditional expressions"
.\" ====================================================================
.
More conditions can be tested with the
.RB \[lq]\| if \|\[rq]
and
.B ie
requests,
as well as the new
.RB \[lq] while \[rq]
request.
.
.
.TP
.BI c\~ chr
True if a character
.I chr
is available;
.I chr
is an
ordinary,
special,
or
indexed
character,
whether defined by a font description file or a request.
.
.
.TP
.BI d\~ nam
True if a string,
macro,
diversion,
or request
.I nam
is defined.
.
.
.TP
.BI F\~ fnt
True if a font
.I fnt
is available;
.I fnt
can be an abstract style
or a font name.
.
.I fnt
is handled as if it were an argument to the
.B ft
request
(that is,
the default family is combined with an abstract style and font
translation is applied),
but
.I fnt
cannot be a mounting position,
and no font is mounted.
.
.
.TP
.BI m\~ col
True if a color
.I col
is defined.
.
.
.TP
.BI r\~ reg
True if a register
.I reg
is defined.
.
.
.TP
.BI S\~ sty
True if an abstract style
.I sty
is registered.
.
Font translations apply.
.
.
.TP
.B v
Always false.
.
This condition exists for compatibility with certain other
.I troff
implementations.
.
(We refer to
.IR vtroff ,
a translator that converted the C/A/T command stream
produced by early-vintage AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
to a form suitable for Versatec and Benson-Varian plotters.)
.
.
.br
.ne 6v
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Drawing commands"
.\" ====================================================================
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
extends the
.B \[rs]D
escape sequence
with drawing commands to create filled
circles and ellipses,
and polygons.
.\" CSTR #54 did not countenance polygons, but DWB 3.3 had outlined ones
.\" as \D'p' as we do.  Filled polygons appear to be a GNU innovation.
.
Stroked (outlined) objects are drawn with the stroke color and
filled (solid) ones shaded with the fill color.
.
These are independent properties;
if you want a filled,
stroked figure,
you must draw the same figure twice using each command.
.
A filled figure is smaller
than a stroked one using the same parameters
because the former is drawn only within its defined area,
whereas strokes have a line thickness,
set with another new drawing command.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Notational conventions"
.\" ====================================================================
.
In the request and escape sequence descriptions below,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
reads arguments named
.I character-sequence,
.I command,
.I contents,
.I file,
and
.I message
in copy mode
until the end of the input line.
.
A
.I character-sequence
comprises one or more ordinary,
special,
or indexed characters;
spaces;
or escape sequences that interpolate only these.
.\" XXX: or tabs, leaders, backspace, and delete characters
.
We name the remaining arguments for clarity;
they are also
.I character-sequences.
.
A neutral double quote
.RB \[oq] \[dq] \[cq] \" single quotes around double quote
can optionally prefix a
.I character-sequence;
the formatter discards one if present,
permitting initial embedded spaces in the argument.
.
.
.P
.I input
refers to arbitrary character sequences
(up to a newline or delimiter)
that
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
fully interprets,
in contrast to copy mode.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Escape sequences"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.\" TODO: Some of the synopses here and in "New requests" get pretty
.\" discursive.  It would be better to lift the introduction of new
.\" concepts in groff programming to new subsections above.  Examples
.\" include: string parameterization, user-definable characters,
.\" character properties (cflags), character classes; the hyphenation
.\" language, code, and pattern file system; file stream manipulation...
.\"
.\" _Maybe_ output suppression.  It's a big enough concept, but only
.\" well understood by retired contributors, only used by the grohtml
.\" output driver (still beta after 20 years), and we have some Savannah
.\" tickets that point the way to radically simplifying its design,
.\" eliminating its need to groff before you groff.
.I groff
introduces several new escape sequences,
extends the syntax of the AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
escape sequences
.BR \[rs]D ,
.BR \[rs]f ,
.BR \[rs]k ,
.BR \[rs]n ,
.BR \[rs]s ,
.BR \[rs]$ ,
and
.BR \[rs]* ,
and alters the behavior of
.BR \[rs]X .
.
The following list collates
escape sequences alphabetically at first,
and then by symbol roughly in Unicode code point order.
.\" Exceptions are made to group closely-related escape sequences in an
.\" order more agreeable to the development of a topic.
.
Neutral apostrophes
.B \[aq]
illustrate escape sequences with a user-selectable delimiter.
.
Many others are available;
see subsection \[lq]Miscellaneous\[rq]
and section \[lq]Compatibility Mode\[rq] below.
.
.
.TP 10n \" "\D'E h v'" + 2n + hand-tuned for PDF
.BI \[rs]A\[aq] input \[aq]
Interpolate 1 if
.I input
is a valid identifier,
and\~0 otherwise.
.
Because GNU
.I troff \" GNU
ignores any input character with an invalid code when reading it,
invalid identifiers are empty or contain spaces,
tabs,
newlines,
or escape sequences that interpolate something other than a sequence of
ordinary characters.
.
You can employ
.B \[rs]A
to validate a macro argument before using it to construct another escape
sequence or identifier.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]B\[aq] input \[aq]
Interpolate 1 if
.I input
is a valid numeric expression,
and\~0 otherwise.
.
You might use
.B \[rs]B
along with the
.RB \[lq]\| if \|\[rq]
request to filter out invalid macro arguments.
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]D\[aq]C\~ "d" \[aq]
Draw filled circle of diameter
.I d
with its leftmost point at the drawing position.
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]D\[aq]E\~ "h v" \[aq]
Draw filled ellipse of axis lengths
.I h
and
.IR v ,
with its leftmost point at the drawing position.
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]D\[aq]p\~ "h1 v1"\~\c
.RI .\|.\|.\~ "hn vn"\c
.B \[aq]
Draw polygon with vertices at the drawing position
and each point in sequence.
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
closes the polygon by drawing a line from
.RI ( hn ,\~ vn )
back to the initial drawing position;
DWB and Heirloom
.IR troff s \" DWB, Heirloom
do not.
.
.\" XXX: This would be the "STUPID_DRAWING_POSITIONING" complained of in
.\" src/libs/libdriver/input.cpp.  It is neither the rightmost point
.\" of the figure nor the initial drawing position that GNU troff
.\" automatically returned to close the figure.
Afterward,
the drawing position is left at
.RI ( hn ,\~ vn ).
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]D\[aq]P\~ "h1 v1"\~\c
.RI .\|.\|.\~ "hn vn"\c
.B \[aq]
As
.BR \[rs]D\[aq]p\[aq] ,
but the polygon is filled.
.
.I groff
does not specify how the output device must fill concave or
self-intersecting polygons.
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]D\[aq]t\~ "n" \[aq]
Set line thickness of geometric objects
.RI to\~ n
basic units.
.
A zero
.I n
selects the minimum supported thickness.
.
A negative
.I n
(the default)
selects a thickness proportional to the type size.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]E
Embed an escape character that is not interpreted in copy mode
(compare with
.B \[rs]a
and
.BR \[rs]t ).
.
You can use it to ease the writing of nested macro definitions.
.
It is also convenient to define strings containing escape sequences that
need to work when used in copy mode
(for example,
as macro arguments),
or that will be interpolated at varying macro nesting depths.
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]f\^[ fnt ]
Select typeface
.IR fnt ,
which may be a mounting position,
abstract style,
or font name.
.
.BR \[rs]f\^[] ,
.BR \[rs]f\^[P] ,
and
.B \[rs]f\^P
are synonyms;
we recommend the first.
.
.
.br
.ne 4v
.TP
.BI \[rs]F f
.TQ
.BI \[rs]F( fm
.TQ
.BI \[rs]F[ fml ]
Select default font family.
.
.B \[rs]F[]
makes the previous font family the default.
.
.B \[rs]FP
is unlike
.BR \[rs]f\^P ;
it selects font family \[lq]P\[rq] as the default.
.
See the
.B fam
request below.
.
.
.br
.ne 3v
.TP
.BI \[rs]k( rg
.TQ
.BI \[rs]k[ reg ]
Store the horizontal drawing position,
relative to that corresponding to the start of the input line
(ignoring page offset and indentation),
in two-character register
.RI name\~ rg
or arbitrary register
.RI name\~ reg .
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]m c
.TQ
.BI \[rs]m( cl
.TQ
.BI \[rs]m[ col ]
Set stroke color to
.IR col .
.
.B \[rs]m[]
restores the previous stroke color,
or the default if there is none.
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]M c
.TQ
.BI \[rs]M( cl
.TQ
.BI \[rs]M[ col ]
Set fill color to
.IR col .
.
.B \[rs]M[]
restores the previous fill color,
or the default if there is none.
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]n[ reg ]
Interpolate register
.IR reg .
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]O n
.TQ
.BI \[rs]O[ n ]
Suppress
.I @g@troff
output of glyphs and geometric objects.
.
The sequences
.BR \[rs]O2 ,
.BR \[rs]O3 ,
.BR \[rs]O4 ,
and
.B \[rs]O5
are intended for internal use by
.MR grohtml @MAN1EXT@ .
.
.
.RS
.TP
.B \[rs]O0
.TQ
.B \[rs]O1
Disable and enable,
respectively,
the emission of glyphs and geometric objects to the output driver,
provided that this sequence occurs at the outermost suppression level
(see
.B \[rs]O3
and
.BR \[rs]O4 ).
.
Horizontal motions corresponding to non-overstruck glyph widths still
occur.
.
These sequences also reset the registers
.BR opminx ,
.BR opminy ,
.BR opmaxx ,
and
.B opmaxy
to\~\-1.
.
These four registers mark the top left and bottom right hand corners of
a box encompassing all written or drawn output.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]O2
At the outermost suppression level,
enable emission of glyphs and geometric objects,
and write to the standard error stream the page number and values of the
four aforementioned registers encompassing glyphs written since the last
interpolation of a
.B \[rs]O
sequence,
as well as the page offset,
line length,
image file name
(if any),
horizontal and vertical device motion quanta,
and input file name.
.
Numeric values are in basic units.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]O3
.TQ
.B \[rs]O4
Begin and end a nested suppression level,
respectively.
.
.I \%grohtml
uses this mechanism to create images of output preprocessed with
.IR @g@pic ,
.IR @g@eqn ,
and
.IR @g@tbl .
.
At startup,
.I @g@troff
is at the outermost suppression level.
.
.I \%pre\-grohtml
generates these sequences when processing the document,
using
.I @g@troff
with the
.B ps
output device,
Ghostscript,
and the PNM tools to produce images in PNG format.
.
These sequences start a new page if the device is not
.B html
or
.BR xhtml ,
to reduce the number of images crossing a page boundary.
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]O5[ Pfile ]
At the outermost suppression level,
write the name
.I file
to the standard error stream at position
.IR P ,
which must be one of
.BR l ,
.BR r ,
.BR c ,
or
.BR i ,
corresponding to
left,
right,
centered,
and inline alignments within the document,
respectively.
.
.I file
is a name associated with the production of the next image.
.RE
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]R\[aq] name\~\[+-]n \[aq]
Synonymous with
.RB \[lq] .nr
.IR name\~\[+-]n \[rq].
.
.TP
.B \[rs]s[0]
.TQ
.B \[rs]s\[aq]0\[aq]
Restore the previous type size;
no operation if there is none.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]s[ \[+-]n ]
.TQ
.BI \[rs]s \[+-] [ n ]
.TQ
.BI \[rs]s\[aq] \[+-]n \[aq]
.TQ
.BI \[rs]s \[+-] \[aq] n \[aq]
Set the type size to,
or increment or decrement it by,
.IR n \~typographical
points.
.
.
.br
.ne 5v
.TP
.BI \[rs]V e
.TQ
.BI \[rs]V( ev
.TQ
.BI \[rs]V[ env ]
Interpolate contents of the system environment variable
.I env
(one-character
.RI name\~ e ,
two-character
.RI name\~ ev)
as returned by
.MR getenv 3 .
.
.B \[rs]V
is interpreted even in copy mode.
.
.
.\" TODO: When we get this giant headache generalized and adapted to the
.\" `device` request, move this discussion into a dedicated subsection
.\" above.
.TP
.BI \[rs]X\[aq] character-sequence \[aq]
Unlike AT&T
.IR troff , \" AT&T
GNU
.I troff \"
performs some limited processing of the sequence of ordinary characters,
special characters,
and spaces in
.IR character-sequence .
.
.
.\" XXX: Force paragraph spacing here.  I know--it's terrible.  And
.\" unnecessary once we get this giant discussion moved to its own
.\" (sub)section.
.sp \n[PD]u
.\"IP
The formatter's special character repertoire is unknown
to output drivers outside of glyphs named in a device's fonts,
and even then they may not possess complete coverage of the names
documented in
.MR groff_char @MAN7EXT@ .
.
Further,
escape sequences that produce horizontal or vertical motions,
hyphenation breaks,
or that are dummy characters may appear in strings
or be converted to nodes,
particularly in diversions. \" (@pxref{Gtroff Internals})
.
When they occur in a device extension command,
they produce warnings in category
.RB \[lq] char \[rq].
.
These are not representable when interpolated directly into
device-independent output,
as might be done when writing out tag names for PDF bookmarks,
which can appear in a viewer's navigation pane.
.
This is also the case for a small number of special characters,
such as
.BR \[rs][ru] ,
the baseline rule,
that lack a Unicode definition.
.
.
.sp \n[PD]u
.\"IP
So that any Unicode code point can be represented in device extension
commands,
for example in an author's name in document metadata
or as a usefully named bookmark or hyperlink anchor,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
transforms its argument to represent characters
outside the Unicode Basic Latin range
as Unicode code points expressed in
.IR groff 's
notation for these,
\[lq]\|\c
.BI \[rs][u XXXX ]\c
\|\[rq];
see
.MR groff_char @MAN7EXT@ .
.
For these transformations,
the formatter ignores character translations and definitions.
.
.
.sp \n[PD]u
.\"IP
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
converts several ordinary characters that typeset as non-basic Latin
code points to code points outside that range so that they are used
consistently whether they are formatted as glyphs or used in a device
extension command argument.
.
These ordinary characters are
.RB \[lq]\| \[aq] \|\[rq],
.RB \[lq]\| \- \|\[rq],
.RB \[lq]\| \[ha] \|\[rq],
.RB \[lq]\| \[ga] \|\[rq],
and
.RB \[lq]\| \[ti] \|\[rq];
others are written as-is.
.
Thus,
.RB \[lq]\| \[aq] \|\[rq]
transforms to
.RB \[lq]\| \[rs][u2019] \|\[rq].
.
.
.sp \n[PD]u
.\"IP
Contrariwise,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
translates special characters that typeset
as Unicode basic Latin characters
to basic Latin characters accordingly.
.
Thus,
.RB \[lq]\| \[rs][ga] \|\[rq]
transforms to
.RB \[lq]\| \[ga] \|\[rq],
.RB \[lq]\| \[rs][Do] \|\[rq]
to
.RB \[lq]\| $ \|\[rq],
and so on.
.
.
.br
.ne 5v
.TP
.BI \[rs]Y m
.TQ
.BI \[rs]Y( ma
.TQ
.BI \[rs]Y[ mac ]
Interpolate a macro or string as a device extension command.
.
As
.BI \[rs]X\[aq]\[rs]*[ mac ]\[aq]\c
,
except that GNU
.I troff \" GNU
does not interpret the contents of
.IR mac ;
further,
.I mac
can be a macro and thus contain newlines,
unlike the argument to
.B \[rs]X .
.
This inclusion of newlines requires an extension to the AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
device-independent page description language,
and their presence confuses drivers that do not know about it
(see subsection \[lq]Device control commands\[rq] of
.MR groff_out @MAN5EXT@ ).
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]Z\[aq] input \[aq]
Save the drawing position,
format
.IR input ,
then restore it.
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
ignores tabs and leaders in
.I input
with an error diagnostic.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]#
Read everything up to and including the next newline in copy mode and
discard it.
.
.B \[rs]#
is like
.BR \[rs]" ,
except that
.B \[rs]"
does not ignore a newline;
the latter therefore cannot be used by itself for a whole-line
comment\[em]it leaves a blank line on the input stream.
.
.
.\" Keep \$0 before \$( in spite of collation.
.TP
.B \[rs]$0
Interpolate the name by which the macro being interpreted was called.
.
In GNU
.I troff \" GNU
this name can vary;
see the
.B als
request.
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]$( nn
.TQ
.BI \[rs]$[ nnn ]
In a macro or string definition,
interpolate
the
.IR nn th
or
.IR nnn th
argument.
.
In GNU
.IR troff , \" GNU
macros and strings can have an unlimited number of arguments.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]$*
In a macro or string definition,
interpolate the catenation of all arguments,
separated by spaces.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]$@
In a macro or string definition,
interpolate the catenation of all arguments,
with each surrounded by double quotes and separated by spaces.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]$\[ha]
In a macro or string definition,
interpolate the catenation of all arguments
constructed in a form suitable for passage to the
.B ds
request.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs])
Interpolate a
.I transparent
dummy character\[em]one that is ignored by end-of-sentence detection.
.
It behaves as
.BR \[rs]& ,
except that
.B \[rs]&
is treated as letters and numerals normally are after
\[lq].\[rq],
\[lq]?\[rq],
and
\[lq]!\[rq];
.B \[rs]&
cancels end-of-sentence detection,
and
.B \[rs])
does not.
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]*[ "string\~\c
.RI [ arg \~.\|.\|.]\c
.B ]
Interpolate
.I string,
passing it
.I arg
\&.\|.\|.\&
as arguments.
.
.
.\" Keep \/ before \, in spite of collation.
.TP
.B \[rs]\|/
Apply an
.IR "italic correction" :
modify the spacing of the preceding glyph
so that the distance between it and the following glyph
is correct if the latter is of upright shape.
.
For example,
if an italic\~\[lq]f\^\[rq] is followed immediately
by a roman right parenthesis,
then in many fonts the top right portion of the\~\[lq]f\^\[rq]
overlaps the top of the right parenthesis,
.if t producing \f[I]f\f[R]),
which is ugly.
.
Inserting
.B \[rs]\^/
between them
.if t \{\
.  nop produces
.  ie \n(.g \f[I]f\/\f[R])
.  el       \f[I]f\|\f[R])
.  nop and
.\}
avoids this problem.
.
Consider using
.B \[rs]\^/
whenever a slanted glyph
is immediately followed by an upright glyph
without any intervening space.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs],
Apply a
.IR "left italic correction" :
modify the spacing of the following glyph
so that the distance between it and the preceding glyph
is correct if the latter is of upright shape.
.
For example,
if a roman left parenthesis is immediately followed
by an italic\~\[lq]f\^\[rq],
then in many fonts the bottom left portion of the\~\[lq]f\^\[rq]
overlaps the bottom of the left parenthesis,
.if t producing \f[R](\f[I]f\f[R],
which is ugly.
.
Inserting
.B \[rs]\^,
between them
.if t \{\
.  nop produces
.  ie \n(.g \f[R](\,\f[I]f\f[R]
.  el       \f[R](\^\f[I]f\f[R]
.  nop and
.\}
avoids this problem.
.
Consider using
.B \[rs]\^,
whenever an upright glyph
is followed immediately by a slanted glyph
without any intervening space.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]:
Insert a non-printing break point.
.
That is,
a word can break there,
but the soft hyphen character does not mark the break point if it does
(in contrast to
.RB \[lq]\^ \[rs]% \[rq]).
.
The remainder of the word is subject to hyphenation as normal.
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs]? character-sequence \[rs]?
Suppress formatting of
.I character-sequence.
.
This feature has two applications.
.
.
.IP
Surround operands to the output comparison operator
with
.B \[rs]?\&
to compare them
by character rather than as formatted output.
.
Since
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
reads comparands protected with
.B \[rs]?\&
in copy mode,
they need not even be valid
.I groff
syntax.
.
The escape character is still lexically recognized,
however,
and consumes the next character.
.
.
.IP
When used in a diversion,
.B \[rs]?\&
transparently embeds input,
read in copy mode,
until its own next occurrence on the input line.
.
Use
.B \[rs]!\&
if you want to embed newlines in a diversion.
.
Unlike
.BR \[rs]! ,
.B \[rs]?\&
is interpreted even in copy mode,
and a
.I character-sequence
in the top-level diversion
is not sent to device-independent output.
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs][ char ]
Typeset the special character
.IR char .
.
See
.MR groff_char @MAN7EXT@ .
.
.
.TP
.BI \[rs][ "base-char combining-component\~"\c
.RB .\|.\|. ]
Typeset a composite glyph consisting of
.I base-char
overlaid with one or more
.IR combining-component s.
.
For example,
.RB \[lq]\| \[rs][A\~ho] \^\[rq]
is a capital letter \[lq]A\[rq] with a \[lq]hook accent\[rq] (ogonek).
.
See the
.B \%composite
request below;
.IR "Groff: The GNU Implementation of troff" ,
the
.I groff
Texinfo manual,
for details of composite glyph name construction;
and
.MR groff_char @MAN7EXT@
for a list of components used in composite glyph names.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]\[ti]
Insert an adjustable,
unbreakable space.
.
As with ordinary spaces,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
discards any sequence of these at the end of an output line
if a break occurs.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Restricted requests"
.\" ====================================================================
.
To mitigate risks from untrusted input documents,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
disables the
.BR cf ,
.BR pi ,
and
.B sy
requests by default.
.
Its
.B \-U
option enables \[lq]unsafe mode\[rq],
restoring their function
(and enabling additional
.I groff
extension requests,
.RB \[lq] open \[rq],
.BR opena ,
and
.BR pso ).
.
.
.br
.ne 6v
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Altered requests"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.BI .bd\~ "special-font font"
Stop emboldening
.I special-font
when
.I font
is selected.
.
.\" XXX:
.\" Possibly allow prefixing an integer with `\&` to force
.\" interpretation of this form.
.I special-font
must be a font name,
not a mounting position.
.
.TP
.BR .cf\~ [ \[dq] ]\c
.I file
Break and copy the contents of
.I file
as \[lq]throughput\[rq] to
GNU
.IR troff 's \" GNU
output.
.
If a diversion is in use,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
performs the copy only when the diversion is emitted.
.
In AT&T
.IR troff , \" AT&T
the contents of
.I file
are immediately copied to the output regardless of whether a diversion
is being written to;
this behavior is so anomalous that it must be considered a bug.
.
.
.IP
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
removes a leading neutral double quote
.RB \[oq] \[dq] \[cq]
from the argument,
permitting initial embedded spaces in it,
and reads it to the end of the input line in copy mode.
.
If
.I file
does not exist or is not readable,
a warning in category
.RB \[lq] file \[rq]
is emitted
and the request has no other effect.
.
.
.\" BEGIN Keep in sync with groff.texi node "Compatibility Mode".
.br
.ne 6v
.TP
.BI .de\~ name\~\c
.RI [ end-name ]
.TQ
.BI .am\~ name\~\c
.RI [ end-name ]
.TQ
.BI .ds\~ name\~\c
.RB [[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR contents ]
.TQ
.BI .as\~ name\~\c
.RB [[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR contents ]
In compatibility mode,
these requests behave as
.BR de1 ,
.BR am1 ,
.BR ds1 ,
and
.BR as1 ,
respectively:
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
inserts a
.I "compatibility save"
token at the beginning of the macro,
string,
or appendment thereto as applicable
and a
.I "compatibility restore"
token at its end,
enabling compatibility mode during its interpolation.
.
Thus they work as expected
even if the interpolation context disables compatibility mode.
.\" END Keep in sync with groff.texi node "Compatibility Mode".
.
.
.TP
.BI .hy\~ n
New values 16 and\~32 are available;
the former enables hyphenation before the last character in a word,
and the latter enables hyphenation after the first character in a word.
.
If invoked without an argument,
the mode configured by the
.B hydefault
request is selected.
.
.
.TP
.BI .lf\~ input-line-number\~\c
.RB [[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR file-identifier ]
In GNU
.I troff \" GNU
the first argument becomes the input line number of the
.I next
line the formatter reads.
It also
removes a leading neutral double quote
.RB \[oq] \[dq] \[cq]
from
.I file-identifier,
permitting initial embedded spaces in it,
and reads it to the end of the input line in copy mode.
.
.
.TP
.BR .nx\~ [[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR file ]
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
removes a leading neutral double quote
.RB \[oq] \[dq] \[cq]
from
.IR file ,
permitting initial embedded spaces in it,
and reads it to the end of the input line in copy mode.
.
.
.TP
.BR .pi\~ [ \[dq] ]\c
.I command
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
strips a leading neutral double quote from the argument,
permitting initial embedded spaces in it.
.
.
.TP
.BI .pm\~ name\~\c
\&.\|.\|.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
reports,
to the standard error stream,
the JSON-encoded name and contents of each macro,
string,
or diversion
.IR name .
.
.
.TP
.BR .so\~ [ \[dq] ]\c
.I file
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
removes a leading neutral double quote
.RB \[oq] \[dq] \[cq]
from
.IR file ,
permitting initial embedded spaces in it,
and reads it to the end of the input line in copy mode.
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
searches for
.I file
in any directories specified by
.B \-I
command-line options,
followed by the current working directory.
.
If
.I file
does not exist or is not readable,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
emits a warning in category
.RB \[lq] file \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.BI .ss\~ word-space-size\~\c
.RI [ additional-sentence-space-size ]
A second argument sets the amount of additional space separating
sentences on the same output line.
.
If omitted,
this amount is set to
.IR word-space-size .
.
Both arguments are in twelfths of current font's space width
(typically one-fourth to one-third em for Western scripts;
see
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@ ).
.
The default for both parameters is\~12.
.
Negative values are erroneous.
.
.
.TP
.BR .sy\~ [ \[dq] ]\c
.I command
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
strips a leading neutral double quote from the argument,
permitting initial embedded spaces in it.
.
.
.TP
.BR .ta\~ [[\c
.IR "n1 n2\~" .\|.\|.\~ nn \~]\c
.BR T \~\c \" space in roman because we must use 2-font macro with \c
.IR "r1 r2\~" .\|.\|.\~ rn ]
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
supports an extended syntax to specify repeating tab stops after
the
.RB \[lq] T \[rq]
mark.
.
These values are always taken as relative distances from the previous
tab stop.
.
This is the idiomatic way to specify tab stops at equal intervals in
.IR groff .
.
GNU
.IR troff 's \" GNU
startup value is
.RB \[lq] "T 0.5i" \[rq].
.
.
.IP
The syntax summary above instructs
.I groff
to set tabs at positions
.IR n1 ,
.IR n2 ,
\&.\|.\|.\|,
.IR nn ,
then at
.IR nn \|+\| r1 ,
.IR nn \|+\| r2 ,
\&.\|.\|.\|,
.IR nn \|+\| rn ,
then at
.IR nn \|+\| rn \|+\| r1 ,
.IR nn \|+\| rn \|+\| r2 ,
\&.\|.\|.\|,
.IR nn \|+\| rn \|+\| rn ,
and so on.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "New requests"
.\" ====================================================================
.
Several GNU
.I troff \" GNU
requests work like AT&T
.IR troff 's \" AT&T
.RB \[lq] as \[rq]
and
.B ds
requests,
accepting an optional leading neutral double quote,
notated
.\" Use single quotes here for quotation to avoid the perversity of an
.\" output device lacking directional double quotes rendering the
.\" following as `"["]"`.
.RB \[oq][ \[dq] ]\[cq],
in an argument that the formatter reads
in copy mode to the end of the input line,
permitting inclusion of leading spaces.
.
.
.TP 8n \" ".break" + 2n
.BI .aln\~ "new-register existing-register"
Create alias
(additional name)
.I new-register
of
.IR existing-register ,
causing the names to refer to the same stored object.
.
If
.I existing-register
is undefined,
the formatter ignores the request.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
produces a warning in category
.RB \[lq] reg \[rq].
.
See section \[lq]Warnings\[rq] of
.MR @g@troff 1
regarding the enablement and suppression of warnings.
.
To remove a register alias,
invoke
.B rr
on its name.
.
A register's contents do not become inaccessible until it has no more
names.
.
.
.TP
.BI .als\~ "new-name existing-name"
Create alias
(additional name)
.I new-name
of request,
string,
macro,
or diversion
.IR existing-name ,
causing the names to refer to the same stored object.
.
If
.I existing-name
is undefined,
the formatter ignores the request.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
produces a warning in category
.RB \[lq] mac \[rq].
.
If
.I new-name
already exists,
its contents are lost unless already aliased.
.
See section \[lq]Warnings\[rq] of
.MR @g@troff 1
regarding the enablement and suppression of warnings.
.
To remove an alias,
invoke
.B rm
on its name.
.
The object itself is not destroyed until it has no more names.
.
.
.IP
When a request,
macro,
string,
or diversion is aliased,
redefinitions and appendments \[lq]write through\[rq] alias names.
.
To replace an alias with a separately defined object,
remove its name first.
.
.
.TP
.BI .am1\~ name\~\c
.RI [ end-name ]
As
.RB \[lq] am \[rq],
but
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
disables compatibility mode while interpreting the appendment to
.I name:
it inserts a
.I "compatibility save"
token at the beginning of the appendment,
and a
.I "compatibility restore"
token at its end.
.
The requests
.RB \[lq] am \[rq],
.BR am1 ,
.BR de ,
and
.B de1
can thus be intermixed freely
since the compatibility save/\:restore tokens
affect only the parts of the macro populated by
.B am1
and
.BR de1 .
.
.
.TP
.BI .ami\~ name\~\c
.RI [ end-name ]
Append to macro indirectly.
.
See
.B dei
below.
.
.
.TP
.BI .ami1\~ name\~\c
.RI [ end-name ]
As
.BR ami ,
but
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
disables compatibility mode
while interpreting the appendment to the macro
named by the contents of string
.I name;
see
.B am1
above.
.
.
.TP
.BI .as1\~ name\~\c
.RB [[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR contents ]
As
.RB \[lq] as \[rq],
but
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
disables compatibility mode
while interpreting the appendment to the string
.I name:
it inserts a
.I "compatibility save"
token at the beginning of the appendment,
and a
.I "compatibility restore"
token at its end.
.
The requests
.RB \[lq] as \[rq],
.BR as1 ,
.BR ds ,
and
.B ds1
can thus be intermixed freely
since the compatibility save/\:restore tokens
affect only the portions of the string populated by
.B as1
and
.BR ds1 .
.
.
.TP
.BI .asciify\~ div
.I Unformat
the diversion
.I div
in a way such that Unicode basic Latin (US-ASCII) characters,
characters translated with the
.B trin
request,
space characters,
and some escape sequences
that were formatted in the diversion
.I div
are treated like ordinary input characters when
.I div
is interpolated.
.
Doing so can be useful in conjunction with the
.B writem
request.
.
.
.IP
When transforming a glyph node back into an input sequence
that demands expression as a special character escape sequence,
GNU
.I troff
uses the default escape character.
.
.
.IP
.B \%asciify
cannot return all nodes in a diversion to their source equivalents:
those produced by indexed characters
.RB ( \[rs]N ),
for example,
remain nodes,
so the result cannot be guaranteed to be a character sequence
as a macro or string is.
.\" TODO: We _could_ store the integer argument to the `\N` escape
.\" sequence in the node data, enabling such reversal.
.
Give the diversion name as an argument to the
.B pm
request to inspect its contents and node list.
.
Glyph parameters such as the type face and size are not preserved;
use
.RB \%\[lq] unformat \[rq]
to achieve that.
.
.
.TP
.B .backtrace
Write backtrace of input stack to the standard error stream.
.
See the
.B \-b
option of
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@ .
.
.
.TP
.BR .blm\~ [\c
.IR name ]
Set a blank line macro (trap).
.
If a blank line macro is thus defined,
.I groff
executes
.I name
when a blank line is encountered in the input,
instead of the usual behavior.
.
A line consisting only of spaces is also treated as blank and subject to
this trap.
.
If no argument is supplied,
the default blank line behavior is (re-)established.
.
.
.br
.ne 4v
.TP
.BR .box\~ [\c
.IR name ]
.TQ
.BR .boxa\~ [\c
.IR name ]
Divert
(or append)
output to
.I name,
similarly to the
.B di
and
.B da
requests,
respectively.
.
Any pending output line is
.I not
included in the diversion.
.
Without an argument,
stop diverting output;
any pending output line inside the diversion is discarded.
.
.
.TP
.B .break
Exit a
.RB \[lq] while \[rq]
loop.
.
Do not confuse this request with a typographical break or the
.B br
request.
.
See
.RB \[lq] continue \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.B .brp
Break and force adjustment of the output line
per the current adjustment mode.
.
Like
.BR br ,
it does nothing if invoked with the no-break control character.
.
.
.TP
.BI .cflags\~ "n c"\c
\&.\|.\|.
Assign properties encoded by non-negative integer
.I n
to each character or class
.IR c .
.
Spaces need not separate
.I c
arguments.
.
.
.\" TODO: Bust discussion of character flags into its own subsection?
.IP
.I n
is the sum of any of the following.
.
Some combinations are nonsensical,
such as
.RB \[lq] 33 \[rq]
(1 + 32).
.
.
.RS
.IP 1
Recognize the character as ending a sentence if followed by a newline
or two spaces.
.
Initially,
characters
.RB \[lq] .?!\& \[rq]
have this property.
.
.
.IP 2
Enable breaks before the character.
.
A line is not broken at a character with this property unless the
characters on each side both have non-zero hyphenation codes.
.
This exception can be overridden by adding 64.
.
Initially,
no characters have this property.
.
.
.IP 4
Enable breaks after the character.
.
A line is not broken at a character with this property unless the
characters on each side both have non-zero hyphenation codes.
.
This exception can be overridden by adding 64.
.
Initially,
characters
.RB \[lq] \-\[rs][hy]\[rs][em] \^\[rq]
have this property.
.
.
.IP 8
Mark the glyph associated with this character as overlapping other
instances of itself horizontally.
.
Initially,
characters
.RB \[lq]\^ \[rs][ul]\[rs][rn]\[rs][ru]\[rs][radicalex]\[rs][sqrtex]\
\& \^\[rq]
have this property.
.
.
.IP 16
Mark the glyph associated with this character as overlapping other
instances of itself vertically.
.
Initially,
the character
.RB \[lq]\^ \[rs][br] \^\[rq]
has this property.
.
.
.IP 32
Mark the character as transparent for the purpose of end-of-sentence
recognition.
.
In other words,
an end-of-sentence character followed by any number of characters with
this property is treated as the end of a sentence if followed by a
newline or two spaces.
.
This is the same as having a zero space factor in \*[tx].
.
Initially,
characters
.\" The following is ordered with the apostrophe and (single) closing
.\" quote on the ends so they are more easily visually distinguished
.\" from the double quotation marks in roman.
.RB \[lq]\| \[aq]\|"\|)]*\[rs][dg]\[rs][dd]\[rs][rq]\[rs]\^[cq] \|\[rq]
have this property.
.
.
.IP 64
Ignore hyphenation codes of the surrounding characters.
.
Use this value in combination with values 2 and\~4.
.
Initially,
no characters have this property.
.
.
.P
The remaining values were implemented for East Asian language support;
those who use alphabetic scripts exclusively can disregard them.
.
.
.IP 128
Prohibit a break before the character,
but allow a break after the character.
.
This works only in combination with values 256 and 512 and has no effect
otherwise.
.
Initially,
no characters have this property.
.
.
.IP 256
Prohibit a break after the character,
but allow a break before the character.
.
This works only in combination with values 128 and 512 and has no effect
otherwise.
.
Initially,
no characters have this property.
.
.
.IP 512
Allow a break before or after the character.
.
This works only in combination with values 128 and 256 and has no effect
otherwise.
.
Initially,
no characters have this property.
.RE
.
.
.IP
In contrast to values 2 and\~4,
the values 128,
256,
and 512 work
pairwise.
.
If,
for example,
the left character has value 512,
and the right character 128,
no break will be automatically inserted between them.
.
If we use value\~6 instead for the left character,
a break after the character can't be suppressed since the neighboring
character on the right doesn't get examined.
.
.
.TP
.BI .char\~ c\~\c
.RB [[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR contents ]
Define an
ordinary,
special,
or
indexed
character
.I c
as
.I contents.
.
Omitting
.I contents
gives
.I c
an empty definition.
.
.
.IP
Defining
(or redefining)
a
.RI character\~ c
creates a formatter object
that
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
recognizes like any other ordinary,
special,
or indexed character on input,
and produces
.I contents
on output.
.
When
formatting
.IR c ,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
processes
.I contents
in a temporary environment and encapsulates the result
in a node
(see section \[lq]Gtroff Internals\[rq] in
.IR "Groff: The GNU Implementation of troff" ,
the
.I groff
Texinfo manual);
disabling compatibility mode
and setting the escape character to
.RB to\~ \[rs]
while interpreting
.I contents.
.
Any emboldening,
constant spacing,
or track kerning applies to this object
rather than to individual glyphs resulting from the formatting of
.I contents.
.
.
.IP
A character defined by
.B char
can be used just like a glyph provided by the output device.
.
In particular,
other characters can be translated to it with the
.B tr
request;
it can be made the tab or leader fill character with the
.B tc
and
.B lc
requests;
sequences of it can be drawn with the
.B \[rs]l
and
.B \[rs]L
escape sequences;
and,
if the
.B hcode
request is used on
.IR c ,
it is subject to automatic hyphenation.
.
.
.IP
However,
a user-defined character
.I c
does not participate at its boundaries
in kerning adjustments or italic corrections.
.
.
.IP
The formatter prevents infinite recursion
by treating an occurrence
of a character in its own definition
as if it were undefined;
when interpolating such a character,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
emits a warning in category
.RB \[lq] char \[rq].
(Mutually recursive character definitions are handled similarly.)
.
.
.IP
The
.B tr
and
.B trin
requests take precedence if
.B char
also applies
.RI to\~ c .
.
The
.B rchar
request removes character definitions.
.
.
.TP
.BI .chop\~ name
Remove the last character from the macro,
string,
or diversion
.IR name .
.
This is useful for removing the newline from the end of a diversion that
is to be interpolated as a string.
.
This request can be used repeatedly on the same
.IR name ;
see section \[lq]Gtroff Internals\[rq] in
.IR "Groff: The GNU Implementation of troff" ,
the
.I groff
Texinfo manual,
for discussion of nodes inserted by
.IR groff .
.
.
.TP
.BI .class\~ ident\~c\~\c
\&.\|.\|.
Define a character class
(or simply \[lq]class\[rq])
.I ident
comprising the members
.IR c \&.\|.\|.,
where each
.I c
is an
ordinary,
special,
or
indexed
character;
or a
.I "range expression."
.
A class thus defined can then be referred to
in a
.B \%cflags
request in lieu of listing all the characters within it.
.
.
.IP
Since class and special character names share the same name space,
we recommend starting and ending the class name with
.RB \[lq] [ \[rq]
and
.RB \[lq] ] \[rq],
respectively,
to avoid collisions with existing special character names defined by
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
or the user
(with
.B char
and related requests).
.
This practice applies the presence of
.RB \[lq] ] \[rq]
in the class name to prevent the usage of the special character escape
form
.RB \[lq] \[rs][ .\|.\|. ] \[rq],
you must therefore access a class thus named via the
.B \[rs]C
escape sequence.
.
.
.IP
An argument
.I c
can alternatively be a
.I "range expression"
consisting of a start character followed by
.RB \[lq] \- \[rq]
and then an end character.
.
Internally,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
converts these two character names to Unicode code points
(according to the
.I groff
glyph list [GGL]),
which determine the start and end values of the range.
.
If that conversion fails,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
skips the range expression and any remaining arguments.
.\" .
.\" Furthermore,
.\" classes can be nested.
.
.
.TP
.BI .close\~ stream
Close the named
.IR stream ,
invalidating it as an argument to the
.RB \[lq] write \[rq]
request.
.
See
.RB \[lq] open \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.BI .composite\~ c1\~c2
Map ordinary or special character
.I c1
to
.I c2
when
.I c1
is a combining component in a composite character.
.
Typically,
.B composite
is used to map a spacing character to a combining one.
.
See
.MR groff_char @MAN7EXT@ .
.
.
.TP
.B .continue
Skip the remainder of a
.RB \[lq] while \[rq]
loop's body,
immediately retesting its conditional expression.
.
See
.RB \[lq] break \[rq]
above.
.
.
.TP
.BR .color\~ [\c
.IR b ]
Enable or disable output of color-related device-independent output
commands per Boolean expression
.IR b .
.
It is enabled by default,
and if
.I b
is omitted.
.
.
.TP
.BR .cp\~ [\c
.IR b ]
Enable or disable AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
compatibility mode per Boolean expression
.IR b .
.
It is disabled by default,
and enabled if
.I b
is omitted.
.
In compatibility mode,
long names are not recognized,
and the incompatibilities they cause do not arise.
.
.
.TP
.BI .defcolor\~ "ident scheme color-component\~\c"
\&.\|.\|.
Define a color named
.I ident.
.
.I scheme
identifies a color space and determines the number of required
.IR color-component s;
it must be one of
.RB \[lq] rgb \[rq]
(three components),
.RB \[lq] cmy \[rq]
(three components),
.RB \[lq] cmyk \[rq]
(four components),
or
.RB \[lq] gray \[rq]
(one component).
.
.RB \[lq] grey \[rq]
is accepted as a synonym of
.RB \[lq] gray \[rq].
.
Each color component can be encoded as a hexadecimal value starting
with
.B #
or
.BR ## .
.
The former indicates that each component is in the range 0\[en]255
(0\[en]FF),
the latter the range 0\[en]65535 (0\[en]FFFF).
.
Alternatively,
a component can be specified as a decimal fraction in the range 0\[en]1,
interpreted using a default scaling unit
.RB of\~\[lq] f \^\[rq],
which multiplies its value by 65,536
(but clamps it at 65,535).
.
.
.IP
Each output device has a color named
.RB \[lq] default \[rq],
which cannot be redefined.
.
A device's default stroke and fill colors are not necessarily the same.
.
.
.TP
.BI .de1\~ ident\~\c
.RI [ end-name ]
As
.RB \[lq] de \[rq],
but
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
disables compatibility mode while interpreting
.I name:
it inserts a
.I "compatibility save"
token at the beginning of the macro definition,
and a
.I "compatibility restore"
token at its end.
.
See
.B .am1
above.
.
.
.TP
.BI .dei\~ name\~\c
.RI [ end-name ]
Define macro indirectly,
with the name of the macro to be defined in string
.I name
and the name of the end macro terminating its definition in string
.IR end-name .
.
.
.TP
.BI .dei1\~ name\~\c
.RI [ end-name ]
As
.BR dei ,
but
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
disables compatibility mode
while interpreting the macro
named by the contents of string
.I name.
.
See
.B am1
and
.B de1
above.
.
.
.TP
.BR .device\~ [\c
.RB [ \[dq] ]\c
.IR character-sequence ]
Embed
.I character-sequence
into
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
output as parameters to an
.RB \[lq]x X\[rq]
device extension command;
see
.MR groff_out @MAN5EXT@ .
.
The output driver or other postprocessor interprets
.I character-sequence
as it sees fit.
.
.
.TP
.BI .devicem\~ name
Write contents of macro or string
.I name
to
.I @g@troff
output as the argument to a device extension command.
.
.
.TP
.BI .do\~ name\~\c
.RI [ argument \~.\|.\|.]
Interpret the string,
request,
diversion,
or macro
.I name
(along with any further arguments)
with compatibility mode disabled.
.
Compatibility mode is restored
(only if it was active)
when the interpolation of
.I name
is interpreted;
that is,
the restored compatibility state applies to the request or
contents of the macro,
string,
or diversion
.IR name ,
its arguments,
and data read from files or pipes if
.I name
is the
.RB \[lq] so \[rq],
.BR soquiet ,
.BR mso ,
.BR msoquiet ,
or
.B pso
request.
.
.
.TP
.BI .ds1\~ name\~\c
.RB [[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR contents ]
As
.BR ds ,
but GNU
.I troff \" GNU
disables AT&T compatibility mode while interpreting
.IR name :
it inserts a \[lq]compatibility save\[rq] token at the beginning of
.IR contents ,
and a \[lq]compatibility restore\[rq] token after it.
.
.
.TP
.B .ecr
Restore the escape character saved with
.BR ecs ,
or set escape character to
.RB \[lq]\| \[rs] \[rq]
if none has been saved.
.
.
.TP
.B .ecs
Save the current escape character.
.
.
.br
.ne 5v
.TP
.BI .evc\~ env
Copy the properties of environment
.I env
to the current environment,
except for:
.
.
.RS
.IP \[bu] 3n
a partially collected line,
if present;
.
.
.IP \[bu]
the interruption status of the previous input line
(due to use of the
.B \[rs]c
escape sequence);
.
.
.IP \[bu]
the count of remaining lines to center,
to right-align,
or to underline
(with or without underlined spaces)\[em]these are set to zero;
.
.
.IP \[bu]
the activation status of temporary indentation;
.
.
.IP \[bu]
input traps and their associated data;
.
.
.br
.ne 4v
.IP \[bu]
the activation status of line numbering
(which can be reactivated with
.RB \[lq] .nm\~+0 \[rq]);
and
.
.
.IP \[bu]
the count of consecutive hyphenated lines
(set to zero).
.RE
.
.
.IP
Copying an environment to itself discards the foregoing data.
.
.
.TP
.BR .fam\~ [\c
.IR fml ]
Set default font family to
.IR fml .
.
With no argument,
the previous font family is selected,
and if none,
the formatter's default family.
.
This default is \[lq]T\[rq] (Times),
but can be overridden by the output device\[em]see
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@ .
.
The default font family is associated with the environment.
.
See
.BR \[rs]F .
.
.
.TP
.BI .fchar\~ c\~\c
.RB [[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR contents ]
Define fallback
.RI character\~ c
as
.IR contents .
.
As
.BR char ,
but while that request hides a glyph with the same name in the selected
font,
.B fchar
definitions are used only if the font
lacks a glyph for
.IR c .
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
performs this test before searching special fonts.
.
.
.TP
.BR .fcolor\~ [\c
.IR col ]
Select
.I col
as the environment's fill color,
or,
without an argument,
restore the previous fill color,
or the default if there is none.
.
.
.TP
.BI .fschar\~ f\~c\~\c
.RB [[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR contents ]
Define fallback special
.RI character\~ c
for font\~\c
.I f
as
.IR contents .
.
As
.BR char ,
but GNU
.I troff \" GNU
locates a character defined by
.B fschar
after any fonts named as arguments to the
.B \%fspecial
are searched and before those named as arguments to the
.RB \%\[lq] special \[rq]
request.
.
.TP
.BI .fspecial\~ f\~\c
.RI [ s\~ .\|.\|.]
Declare each font
.I s
as special only when
.RB font\~ f
is selected.
.
Initially,
a font
.IR f 's
list of associated special fonts is empty for all
.I f.
.
.\" TODO: Move this sentence to a new (sub)section describing the glyph
.\" resolution procedure.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
searches fonts specified as arguments to the
.RB \%\[lq] special \[rq]
request after those given as arguments to the
.B \%fspecial
request.
.
See
.RB \%\[lq] special \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.BI .ftr\~ f\~\c
.RI [ g ]
Translate
.RI font\~ f
.RI to\~ g .
.
Whenever a font
.RI named\~ f
is referred to in an
.B \[rs]f
escape sequence,
in the
.B F
and
.B S
conditional expression operators,
or in the
.BR ft ,
.BR ul ,
.BR bd ,
.BR cs ,
.BR tkf ,
.RB \%\[lq] special \[rq],
.BR \%fspecial ,
.BR fp ,
or
.B sty
requests,
.RI font\~ g
is used.
If
.I g
is missing or identical
.RI to\~ f ,
then
.RI font\~ f
is not translated.
.
.
.TP
.BI .fzoom\~ f\~\c
.RI [ zoom ]
Set zoom factor
.I zoom
for font\~\c
.IR f .
.I zoom
must be a non-negative integer;
it scales the magnification by thousandths with 1000 as a basis.
If
.I zoom
is missing or equal to zero or 1000,
.RI font\~ f
is not magnified.
.
.IR f \~\c
must be a resolved font name,
not an abstract style or mounting position.
.
.
.TP
.BR .gcolor\~ [\c
.IR col ]
Select
.I col
as the environment's stroke color,
or,
without an argument,
restore the previous stroke color,
or the default if there is none.
.
.
.TP
.BI .hcode\~ "dst1 src1\~"\c
.RI [ "dst2 src2" "] .\|.\|."
Set the hyphenation code of character
.I dst1
to that of
.IR src1 ,
and so on.
.
.I dst1
must be an ordinary character
(other than a numeral)
or a special character,
and
.I src1
must be an ordinary character
(other than a numeral)
or a special character
to which a hyphenation code has already been applied.
.
Assigning the code of an ordinary character to itself
effectively creates a unique hyphenation code
(which can then be copied to others).
.
.B hcode
ignores spaces between arguments.
.
If any argument is invalid,
.B hcode
reports an error and stops reading them.
.
.
.TP
.BR .hla\~ [\c
.IR lang ]
Set the hyphenation language to
.IR lang ,
or clear it if there is no argument.
.
Hyphenation exceptions specified with the
.B hw
request and hyphenation patterns and exceptions specified with the
.B hpf
and
.B hpfa
requests are associated with the hyphenation language.
.
The
.B hla
request is usually invoked by a localization file,
which is in turn loaded by the
.I troffrc
or
.I troffrc\-end
file;
see the
.B hpf
request below.
.
.\" XXX: Not true today, but see Savannah #66387.
.\" The hyphenation language is associated with the environment.
.
.
.TP
.BR .hlm\~ [\c
.IR n ]
Set the consecutive automatically hyphenated line limit to
.I n.
.
A negative value means \[lq]no limit\[rq].
.
Omitting
.I n
implies a limit of
.BR \-1 .
.
This value is associated with the environment.
.
Only lines output from a given environment count toward the maximum
associated with that environment.
.
Hyphens resulting from
.B \[rs]%
are counted;
explicit hyphens are not.
.
.
.TP
.BR .hpf\~ [ \[dq] ]\c
.I pattern-file
Read hyphenation patterns from
.IR pattern-file .
.
This file is sought in the same way that macro files are with the
.B mso
request.
.
.
.IP
The
.I pattern-file
should have the same format as (simple) \*[tx] pattern files.
.
The following scanning rules are implemented.
.
.
.RS
.IP \[bu] 3n
A percent sign starts a comment
(up to the end of the line)
even if preceded by a backslash.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
\[lq]Digraphs\[rq] like
.B \[rs]$
are not supported.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
.RB \[lq] \[ha]\[ha]\c
.IR xx \[rq]
(where each
.I x
is 0\[en]9 or a\[en]f) and
.BI \[ha]\[ha] c
.RI (character\~ c
in the code point range 0\[en]127 decimal)
are recognized;
other uses
.RB of\~ \[ha]
cause an error.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
No macro expansion is performed.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
.B hpf
checks for the expression
.BR \[rs]patterns{ .\|.\|. }
(possibly with whitespace before or after the braces).
.
Everything between the braces is taken as hyphenation patterns.
.
Consequently,
.RB \[lq] { \[rq]
and
.RB \[lq] } \[rq]
are not allowed in patterns.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
Similarly,
.BR \[rs]hyphenation{ .\|.\|. }
gives a list of hyphenation exceptions.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
.B \[rs]endinput
is recognized also.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
For backward compatibility,
if
.B \[rs]patterns
is missing,
the whole file is treated as a list of hyphenation patterns
(but the
.RB \[lq] % \[rq]
character is still recognized as the start of a comment).
.RE
.
.
.IP
Use the
.B hcode
request
(see above)
to map the encoding used in hyphenation pattern files to
.IR groff 's
input encoding.
.
.
.IP
The set of hyphenation patterns is associated with the hyphenation
language set by the
.B hla
request.
.
The
.B hpf
request is usually invoked by a localization file loaded by the
.I troffrc
file.
.
By default,
.I troffrc
loads the localization file for English.
.
See subsection \[lq]Localization packages\[rq] of
.MR groff_tmac @MAN5EXT@
for a list of available localization files.
.
For Western languages,
the localization file sets the hyphenation mode and loads hyphenation
patterns and exceptions.
.
.
.IP
A second call to
.B hpf
(for the same language)
replaces the old patterns with the new ones.
.
.
.IP
Invoking
.B hpf
causes an error if there is no hyphenation language.
.
.
.IP
If no
.B hpf
request is specified
(either in the document,
in a file loaded at startup,
or in a macro package),
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
won't automatically hyphenate at all.
.
.
.TP
.BR .hpfa\~ [ \[dq] ]\c
.I pattern-file
As
.BR hpf ,
except that the hyphenation patterns and exceptions from
.I pattern-file
are appended to the patterns already applied to the hyphenation language
of the environment.
.
.
.TP
.BI .hpfcode\~ "a b"\c
.RI \~[ "c d" "] .\|.\|."
.I Caution:
This request will be withdrawn in a future
.I groff
release.
.
Use
.B hcode
instead.
.
.
.IP
Define mapping values for character codes in pattern files.
.
.B hpf
or
.B hpfa
apply the mapping
after reading or appending to the active list of patterns.
.
Its arguments are pairs of character codes\[em]integers from 0 to\~255.
.
The request maps character
.RI code\~ a
to
.RI code\~ b ,
.RI code\~ c
to
.RI code\~ d ,
and so on.
.
Character codes that would otherwise be invalid in GNU
.I troff \" GNU
can be used.
.
By default,
every code maps to itself except those for letters \[lq]A\[rq] to
\[lq]Z\[rq],
which map to those for \[lq]a\[rq] to \[lq]z\[rq].
.
.
.TP
.BI .hydefault\~ mode
Set hyphenation mode default to
.I mode.
.
When the
.B hy
request is invoked without an argument,
this mode is selected.
.
The hyphenation mode default is associated with the environment.
.
The formatter's default is
.B 1
for AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
compatibility.
.
.I groff
locale files generally set a more appropriate one;
see
.MR groff_tmac @MAN5EXT@ .
.
.
.TP
.BR .hym\~ [\c
.IR length ]
Set the (right) hyphenation margin
.RI to\~ length .
.
If the adjustment mode is not
.RB \[lq] b \[rq]
or
.RB \[lq] n \[rq],
the line is not hyphenated if it is shorter than
.IR length .
.
Without an argument,
the default hyphenation margin is reset to its default value,
0.
.
The default scaling unit
.RB is\~\[lq] m \[rq].
.
The hyphenation margin is associated with the environment.
.
A negative argument resets the hyphenation margin to zero,
emitting a warning in category
.RB \[lq] range \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.BR .hys\~ [\c
.IR hyphenation-space ]
Suppress hyphenation of the line in adjustment modes
.RB \[lq] b \[rq]
or
.RB \[lq] n \[rq],
if that adjustment can be achieved by adding no more than
.I hyphenation-space
extra space to each inter-word space.
.
Without an argument,
the hyphenation space adjustment threshold is set to its default value,
0.
.
The default scaling unit
.RB is\~\[lq] m \[rq].
.
The hyphenation space adjustment threshold is associated with the
environment.
.
A negative argument resets the hyphenation space adjustment threshold to
zero,
emitting a warning in category
.RB \[lq] range \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.BR .itc\~ n\~\c\" TODO: borrow "npl" notation from groff(7)?
.RI [ mac ]
As
.RB \[lq] it \[rq],
but lines interrupted with the
.B \[rs]c
escape sequence do not apply to the line count.
.
.
.TP
.BR .kern\~ [\c
.IR b ]
Enable or disable pairwise kerning of glyphs in the environment per
Boolean expression
.IR b .
.
It is enabled by default,
and if
.I b
is omitted.
.
.
.TP
.BI .length\~ reg\~\c
.RB [[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR contents ]
Compute the number of characters in
.I contents
and store the count in the register
.IR reg .
.
If
.I reg
doesn't exist,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
creates it.
.
.
.IP
.I Caution:
If you interpolate a macro or diversion in
.I contents
(see section \[lq]Punning Names\[rq] in
.MR groff @MAN7EXT@ ),
the
.B length
request counts characters
(or nodes)
only up to the first newline,
and leaves the rest on the input stream.
.
In conventional circumstances,
that means the remainder is interpreted,
and may be formatted.
.
To discover the length of any
string,
macro,
or diversion,
use the
.B pm
request.
.
See section \[lq]Debugging\[rq] below.
.
.
.TP
.BR .linetabs\~ [\c
.IR b ]
Activate or deactivate line-tabs in the environment per Boolean
expression
.IR b .
.
They are inactive by default,
and activated if
.I b
is omitted.
.
When line-tabs are active,
tab stops are computed relative to the start of the pending output line
instead of the drawing position corresponding to the start of the input
line.
.
.
.TP
.BR .lsm\~ [\c
.IR name ]
Set a leading space trap,
calling the macro
.I name
when GNU
.I troff \" GNU
encounters leading spaces on a text line;
the implicit line break that normally happens in this case
is suppressed.
.
The formatter stores the count of leading spaces on the text line
in register
.BR lsn ,
and the amount of corresponding horizontal motion
in register
.BR lss ,
irrespective of whether a leading space trap is set.
.
When it is,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
removes the leading spaces from the input line
and produces no motion before calling
.IR name .
.
.
.IP
If no argument is supplied,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
re\[e ad]stablishes the default handling of leading spaces on text lines
(breaking the line when filling,
and formatting a horizontal motion of
.B \[rs]n[lsn]
word spaces).
.
.
.TP
.BR .mso\~ [ \[dq] ]\c
.I file
As
.RB \[lq] so \[rq],
except that GNU
.I troff \" GNU
searches for the specified
.I file
in the same directories as macro files;
see
.I GROFF_TMAC_PATH
in section \[lq]Environment\[rq] of
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@
and
.B \-m
in section \[lq]Options\[rq]
of the same page.
.
If
.I file
does not exist or is not readable,
a warning in category
.RB \[lq] file \[rq]
is emitted
and the request has no other effect.
.
.
.TP
.BR .msoquiet\~ [ \[dq] ]\c
.I file
As
.BR mso ,
but no warning is emitted if
.I file
does not exist.
.
.
.TP
.BR .nop \~[\c
.IR input ]
Interpret
.I input
as if it were an input line.
.
.B nop
resembles
.RB \[lq] ".if 1" \[rq];
it puts a break on the output if
.I input
is empty.
.
Unlike
.RB \[lq]\| if \|\[rq],
it cannot govern conditional blocks.
.
Its application is to maintain consistent indentation within macro
definitions even when formatting output.
.
.
.TP
.B .nroff
Make the
.B n
conditional expression evaluate true and
.B t
false.
.
See
.BR troff .
.
.
.TP
.BI .open\~ "ident\~\c
.RB [ \[dq] ]\c
.I file
Open
.I file
for writing and associate a stream named
.I ident
with it,
making it available for
.RB \[lq] write \[rq]
requests.
.
Unsafe request;
disabled by default.
.
Also see
.B writec
and
.RB \[lq] close \[rq].
.
.TP
.BI .opena\~ "ident\~\c
.RB [ \[dq] ]\c
.I file
As
.RB \[lq] open \[rq],
but appends to
.I file
if it already exists instead of overwriting it.
.
.
.TP
.BR .output \~[ \[dq] ]\c
.I character-sequence
Emit
.IR character-sequence ,
transparently to
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
output;
this usage is similar to that of
.B \[rs]!\&
when it occurs in the top-level diversion.
.
.
.TP
.BI .pchar\~ c\~\c
\&.\|.\|.
Report,
to the standard error stream,
information about each character
(be it
ordinary,
special,
or indexed)
.RI "or character class\~" c .
.
A character defined by a request
.RB ( char ,
.BR \%fchar ,
.BR \%fschar ,
or
.BR \%schar )
reports its contents as a JSON-encoded string,
but the output is not otherwise in JSON format.
.
.
.TP
.BR .pcolor \~[\c
.IR col \~\&.\|.\|.]
Report,
to the standard error stream,
each defined color named
.IR col ,
its color space identifier,
and channel value assignments,
or,
without arguments,
those of all defined colors.
.
A device's default stroke and/or fill colors,
\[lq]default\[rq],
are not listed since they are immutable and their details unknown to the
formatter.
.
.
.TP
.B .pcomposite
Report,
to the standard error stream,
the list of configured composite character mappings.
.
See
.RB \%\[lq] composite \[rq]
above.
.
The \[lq]from\[rq] code point is listed first,
followed by its \[lq]to\[rq] mapping.
.
.
.TP
.B .pev
Report the state of the current environment followed by that of all
other environments to the standard error stream.
.
.
.TP
.B .pfp
Report,
to the standard error stream,
the list of occupied font mounting positions.
.\" Recall the @code{fp} request description in @ref{Selecting Fonts}.
.
Occupied mounting positions are listed,
one per line,
in increasing order,
followed by the typeface name;
if the name corresponds to an abstract style,
the entry ends there.
.
Otherwise,
the name of the font description file
and the font's \[lq]internal name\[rq] datum,
the meaning of which varies by output device,
follow.
.
.
.TP
.B .pftr
Report,
to the standard error stream,
the list of font translations.
.
See
.B pftr
above.
.
The \[lq]from\[rq] font identifier is listed first,
followed by its \[lq]to\[rq] translation.
.
.
.TP
.B .phw
Report,
to the standard error stream,
the list of hyphenation exception words
associated with the hyphenation language
selected by the
.B hla
request.
.
A
.RB \[lq] \- \[rq]
marks each hyphenation point.
.
A word prefixed with
.RB \[lq] \- \[rq]
is not hyphenated at all.
.
The report suffixes words
to which automatic hyphenation applies
(meaning those defined in a hyphenation pattern file
rather than with the
.B hw
request)
with a tab and asterisk
.RB \[lq] * \[rq].
.
.
.TP
.B .pline
Report,
in JSON syntax to the standard error stream,
the list of output nodes corresponding to the pending output line.
.
In JSON,
a pair of empty brackets
.RB \[lq] "[ ]" \[rq]
represents an empty list.
.
A
.I pending
output line has not yet undergone adjustment,
and lacks a line number and margin character
(all as applicable).
.
.
.TP
.BR .pnr \~[\c
.IR reg \~.\|.\|.]
Report the name and value and,
if its type is numeric,
the autoincrement amount and assigned format of each register
.IR reg ,
or,
without arguments,
those of all defined registers,
to the standard error stream.
.
.
.TP
.BI .psbb \~file
Get the bounding box of a PostScript image
.IR file .
.
This file must conform to Adobe's Document Structuring Conventions;
the request attempts to extract the bounding box values from a
.B \%%%BoundingBox
comment.
.
After invocation,
the
.I x
and
.I y
coordinates
(in PostScript units)
of the lower left and upper right corners can be found in the registers
.BR \[rs]n[llx] ,
.BR \[rs]n[lly] ,
.BR \[rs]n[urx] ,
and
.BR \[rs]n[ury] ,
respectively.
.
If an error occurs,
these four registers are set to zero.
.
.
.TP
.BR .pso\~ [ \[dq] ]\c
.I command
As
.RB \[lq] so \[rq],
except that input comes from the standard output stream of
.IR command ,
which is passed to
.MR popen 3 .
.
.
.TP
.B .pstream
Report,
in
JSON
syntax to the standard error stream,
the list of open streams,
including the name of each open stream,
the name of the file backing it,
and its mode
(writing or appending).
.
.
.TP
.B .ptr
Report the names and vertical positions,
in basic units,
of all page location traps
to the standard error stream.
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
reports empty slots in the list,
where a trap had been planted
but subsequently (re)moved,
because they can affect the visibility of subsequently planted traps.
.
.
.TP
.BI .pvs \~\[+-]n
Set the post-vertical line spacing
.RI to\~ n ;
default scaling unit
.RB is\~\[lq] p \[rq].
.
With no argument,
the post-vertical line space is set to its previous value.
.
.
.IP
In GNU
.IR troff , \" GNU
the distance between text baselines consists of the extra pre-vertical
line spacing set by the most negative
.B \[rs]x
argument on the pending output line,
the vertical spacing
.RB ( vs ),
the extra post-vertical line spacing set by the most positive
.B \[rs]x
argument on the pending output line,
and the post-vertical line spacing set by this request.
.
.
.TP
.BI .rchar\~ c\c
\&.\|.\|.
Remove definition of each
ordinary,
special,
or
indexed
character
.IR c ,
undoing the effect of a
.BR char ,
.BR \%fchar ,
or
.B \%schar
request.
.
Spaces need not separate
.I c
arguments.
.\" XXX: Removal of a class is unspecified.
.
The character definition removed
(if any)
is the first encountered in the resolution process documented
in section \[lq]Using Symbols\[rq] of
.IR "Groff: The GNU Implementation of troff" .
.\" TODO: Get that information into this man page!
.
Glyphs,
which are defined by font description files,
cannot be removed.
.
.
.TP
.BR .return\~ [\c
.IR input ]
.\" XXX: useless request warning if not interpreting a macro?
Stop interpreting an interpolated macro,
skipping to the end of its definition.
.
Do not confuse
.RB \[lq] return \[rq]
with
.BR rt .
.
If called with an argument
.I input,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
performs the skip twice\[em]once within the macro being interpreted
and once in an enclosing macro,
permitting a macro to wrap the request
(as
.I trace\:.tmac
does).
.
.
.
.TP
.BI .rfschar\~ "f c\~"\c
\&.\|.\|.
Remove each fallback special
.RI character\~ c
for font
.IR f .
.
Spaces need not separate
.I c
arguments.
.
See
.BR fschar .
.
.
.TP
.BR .rj\~ [\c
.IR n ]
Break,
right-align the
.RI next\~ n
(default: 1)
input lines,
then break again.
.
.B rj
implies
.RB \[lq] ".ce 0" \[rq],
and
.B ce
implies
.RB \[lq] ".rj 0" \[rq].
.
Invoking the request
with the no-break control character
suppresses the first break.
.
.
.TP
.BI .rnn \~r1\~r2
Rename register
.I r1
to
.IR r2 .
.
If
.I r1
doesn't exist,
the request is ignored.
.
.
.TP
.BI .schar\~ c\~\c
.RB [[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR contents ]
Define global fallback character
.I c
as
.IR contents .
.
As
.BR char ,
but GNU
.I troff \" GNU
locates a character defined with
.B schar
after any fonts named as arguments to the
.RB \%\[lq] special \[rq]
request and before any mounted special fonts.
.
.
.TP
.BR .shc \~\c
.RI [ c ]
Set the soft hyphen character,
inserted when a word is hyphenated automatically or at a hyphenation
character,
.RI to\~ c .
.
If
.I c
is omitted,
the soft hyphen character is set to the default,
.BR \[rs][hy] .
.
If the selected glyph does not exist in the font in use at a potential
hyphenation point,
then the line is not broken at that point.
.
Neither character definitions
.RB ( char
and similar)
nor translations
.RB ( tr
and similar)
are considered when assigning the soft hyphen character.
.
.
.TP
.BR .shift\~ [\c
.IR n ]
.\" XXX: useless request warning if not interpreting a macro or string?
Shift macro or string parameters
.I n
places
(by\~1 if
.I n
omitted):
.RI argument\~ i
becomes argument
.IR i \|\-\| n ;
arguments 1
.RI to\~ n
become unavailable.
.
Shifting by a non-positive amount,
or outside of a macro or string definition,
performs no operation.
.
The register
.B .$
adjusts its value accordingly.
.
.
.TP
.BI .sizes\~ "s1 s2\~"\c
.RI .\|.\|.\~ sn\~\c
.RB [ 0 ]
Set the available type sizes to
.IR s1 ,
.IR s2 ,
\&.\|.\|.\&
.I sn
scaled points.
.
The list of sizes can be terminated by an
.RB optional\~\[lq] 0 \[rq].
.
Each
.I si
can also be a range
.IR m \(en n .
.
In contrast to the device description file directive of the same name
(see
.MR groff_font @MAN5EXT@ ),
the argument list can't extend over more than one line.
.
.
.TP
.BR .soquiet\~ [ \[dq] ]\c
.I file
As
.RB \[lq] so \[rq],
but no warning is emitted if
.I file
does not exist.
.
.
.TP
.BR .special\~ [\c
.IR s\~ .\|.\|.]
Declare each font
.I s
as special,
irrespective of its description file,
populating a list that
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
searches,
in order,
to find the glyph demanded.
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
mounts each font
.I s.
.
Invoking
.B \%special
without arguments empties the list.
.
A font is not automatically unmounted
if a subsequent
.B \%special
request removes it from the list.
.
Initially,
the list is empty.
.
.\" TODO: Move this sentence to a new section description the glyph
.\" resolution procedure.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
searches fonts specified as arguments to the
.RB \%\[lq] special \[rq]
request after those given as arguments to the
.B \%fspecial
request.
.
.
.TP
.BR .spreadwarn\~ [\c
.IR limit ]
Emit a
.RB \[lq] break \[rq]
warning if the additional space inserted for each space between words in
an output line adjusted to both margins with
.RB \[lq] .ad\~b \[rq]
is larger than or equal to
.IR limit .
.
A negative value is treated as zero;
an absent argument toggles the warning on and off without changing
.IR limit .
.
The default scaling unit is
.BR m .
.
At startup,
.B spreadwarn
is inactive and
.I limit
is 3\~m.
.
.
.IP
For example,
.RB \[lq] ".spreadwarn 0.2m" \[rq]
warns if
.I @g@troff
must add 0.2\~m or more to each inter-word space in a line.
.
.
.TP
.BI .stringdown \~str
.TQ
.BI .stringup \~str
Alter the string named
.I str
by replacing each of its bytes with its
lowercase
.RB ( down )
or uppercase
.RB ( up )
version
(if one exists).
.
Special characters
(see
.MR groff_char @MAN7EXT@ )
will often transform in the expected way due to the regular naming
convention for accented characters.
.
When they do not,
use substrings and/or catenation.
.
.
.TP
.BI .sty\~ "pos style"
Associate abstract
.I style
with non-negative font mounting
.RI position\~ pos .
.
.
.TP
.BI .substring\~ "str start\~"\c
.RI [ end ]
Replace the string named
.I str
with its substring bounded by the indices
.I start
and
.IR end ,
inclusively.
.
The first character in the string has index\~0.
.
Negative indices count backward from the end of the string:
the last character has index\~\-1,
the character before the last has index\~\-2,
and so on.
.
If
.I end
is omitted,
.B \-1
is implied.
.
.
.TP
.BI .tkf\~ f\~s1\~n1\~s2\~n2
Enable track kerning for font\~\c
.IR f .
When the current font is\~\c
.IR f ,
the width of every glyph is increased by an amount between
.I n1
and
.IR n2 ;
when the current type size is less than or equal to
.IR s1 ,
the width is increased by
.IR n1 ;
when it is greater than or equal to
.IR s2 ,
the width is increased by
.IR n2 ;
when the type size is greater than or equal to
.I s1
and less than or equal to
.IR s2 ,
the increase in width is a linear function of the type size.
.
.
.TP
.BR .tm1 \~[[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR message ]
As
.BR tm ,
but
removes a leading neutral double quote
.RB \[oq] \[dq] \[cq]
from
.IR message ,
permitting initial embedded spaces in it.
.
.
.TP
.BR .tmc \~[[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR message ]
As
.BR tm1 ,
but does not append a newline.
.
.
.TP
.BI .trf\~ file
Break and copy
.I file
as \[lq]throughput\[rq] to GNU
.I troff \" GNU
output,
discarding characters that are invalid as input;
contrast with
.BR cf .
.
Each line of
.I file
is output as if preceded by
.BR \[rs]! ,
but is not interpreted by the formatter.
.
If
.I file
does not end with a newline,
.B trf
appends one.
.
Invoking the request
with the no-break control character
suppresses the break.
.
.
.TP
.BI .trin\~ abcd
As the
.B tr
request,
but the
.B \%asciify
request uses the character code
(if any)
before the character translation.
.
.
.TP
.BI .trnt\~ abcd
As the
.B tr
request,
but the translations do not apply to text that is
transparently throughput into a diversion with
.BR \[rs]! .
.
.
.TP
.B .troff
Make the
.B t
conditional expression evaluate true and
.B n
false.
.
See
.BR nroff .
.
.
.br
.ne 5v
.TP
.BI .unformat\~ div
Unformat the diversion
.IR div .
.
Unlike
.BR \%asciify ,
.RB \%\[lq] unformat \[rq]
handles only tabs and spaces between words,
the latter usually arising from spaces or newlines in the input.
.
Tabs are treated as input tokens,
and spaces become adjustable again.
.
The vertical sizes of lines are not preserved,
but glyph information
(font,
type size,
space width,
and so on)
is retained.
.
.
.TP
.BR .vpt\~ [\c
.IR b ]
Enable or disable vertical position traps per Boolean expression
.IR b .
.
They are enabled by default,
and if
.I b
is omitted.
.
Vertical position traps are those set by the
.BR ch ,
.BR wh ,
and
.B dt
requests.
.
Vertical position trap enablement is global.
.
.
.TP
.BR .warn\~ [\c
.IR n ]
Select the categories,
or \[lq]types\[rq],
of reported warnings.
.
.IR n \~is
the sum of the numeric codes associated with each warning category that
is to be enabled;
all other categories are disabled.
.
The categories and their associated codes are listed in section
\[lq]Warnings\[rq] of
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@ .
.\" TODO: Maybe move that table to groff(7).
.
For example,
.RB \[lq] ".warn 0" \[rq]
disables all warnings,
and
.RB \[lq] ".warn 1" \[rq]
disables all warnings except those about missing glyphs.
.
If no argument is given,
all warning categories are enabled.
.
.
.TP
.BI .warnscale\~ scaling-unit
Select scaling unit used in certain warnings \" `output_warning()`
(one of
.BR u ,
.BR i ,
.BR c ,
.BR p ,
or
.BR P ;
default:
.BR i ).
.
Ignored on
.IR nroff -mode
output devices,
for which these diagnostics report the vertical page location in lines,
and the horizontal page location in ens.
.
.
.TP
.BI .while \~cond-expr\~input
Evaluate the conditional expression
.IR cond-expr ,
and repeatedly execute
.I input
unless and until
.I cond-expr
evaluates false.
.
.I input,
which is often a conditional block,
is referred to as the
.RB \[lq] while \[rq]
request's
.I body.
.
.
.IP
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
treats the body of a
.RB \[lq] while \[rq]
request similarly to that of a
.B de
request
(albeit one not read in copy mode),
but stores it under an internal name
and deletes it when the loop finishes.
.
The operation of a macro containing a
.RB \[lq] while \[rq]
request can slow significantly if its
body is large.
.
Each time
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
interpolates the macro,
it parses and stores the
.RB \[lq] while \[rq]
body again.
.
An often better solution\[em]and one that is more portable,
since AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
lacked the
.RB \[lq] while \[rq]
request\[em]is to instead write a recursive macro,
which is parsed only once
(unless you redefine it).
.
To prevent infinite loops,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
limits the default number of available recursion levels
to 1,000 or somewhat less
(because things other than macro calls can be on the input stack).
.
You can disable this protective measure,
or alter the limit,
by setting the
.B slimit
register.
.
See section \[lq]Debugging\[rq] below.
.
.
.IP
If a
.RB \[lq] while \[rq]
body begins with a conditional block,
its closing brace must end an input line.
.
.
.IP
The
.RB \[lq] break \[rq]
and
.RB \[lq] continue \[rq]
requests alter a
.RB \[lq] while \[rq]
loop's flow of control.
.
.
.TP
.BI .write\~ stream\~\c
.RB [[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR character-sequence ]
Write
.IR character-sequence ,
a sequence of ordinary characters,
spaces,
or tabs
.\" ...or, technically, backspace and delete characters, but let's not
.\" dwell on that.
read in copy mode,
to
.IR stream ,
which must previously have been the subject of an
.RB \[lq] open \[rq]
(or
.BR opena )
request,
followed by a newline.
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
flushes the stream after writing to it.
.
.
.TP
.BI .writec\~ stream\~\c
.RB [[ \[dq] ]\c
.IR character-sequence ]
As
.RB \[lq] write \[rq],
but does not append a newline to
.IR contents .
.
.
.TP
.BI .writem\~ "stream name"
Write the contents of the macro or string
.I name
to
.IR stream ,
which must previously have been the subject of an
.RB \[lq] open \[rq]
(or
.BR \%opena )
request.
.
The contents of
.I name
are read in copy mode.
.
.
.br
.ne 4v
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Altered registers"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.R]
Because GNU
.I troff \" GNU
dynamically manages register storage,
it repurposes the
.B .R
register
to interpolate the maximum integer representable in the formatter.
.
Favor its use over numeric literals with many zeroes or nines
to indicate an arbitrary large quantity.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.s]
In GNU
.IR troff , \" GNU
the
.B .s
register is string-valued;
it interpolates the type size in typographical points,
which can be represented as a decimal fraction.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "New registers"
.\" ====================================================================
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
exposes more formatter state via many new read-only registers.
.
Their names often correspond to the requests that affect them.
.
.
.TP 14n \" "\n[.hydefault]" + 2n
.B \[rs]n[.br]
Within a macro definition,
interpolate\~1
if the macro is called with the \[lq]normal\[rq] control character
(\[lq].\[rq] by default),
and\~0 otherwise.
.
This facility allows requests to be reliably wrapped by a macro.
.
Interpolating the
.B .br
register outside of a macro definition makes no sense.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.C]
Interpolate 1\~if AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
compatibility mode is in effect,
0\~otherwise.
.
See
.BR cp .
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.cdp]
Interpolate depth of last glyph added to the environment.
.
It is positive if the glyph extends below the baseline.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.ce]
Interpolate count of input lines remaining to be centered
in the environment.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.cht]
Interpolate height of last glyph added to the environment.
.
It is positive if the glyph extends above the baseline.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.color]
Interpolate 1\~if color output is enabled,
0\~otherwise.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.cp]
Within a
.RB \[lq] do \[rq]
request,
interpolate the saved value of compatibility mode
(see
.B \[rs]n[.C]
above).
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.csk]
Interpolate skew of last glyph added to the environment.
.
The
.I skew
of a glyph is how far to the right of the center of a glyph the center
of an accent over that glyph is to be placed.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.ev]
Interpolate name of current environment.
.
This is a string-valued register.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.fam]
Interpolate name of the environment's default font family.
.
This is a string-valued register.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.fn]
Interpolate resolved name of the font selected in the environment.
.
This is a string-valued register.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.fp]
Interpolate next free non-zero font mounting position.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.g]
Interpolate\~1.
.
Test with
.RB \[lq]\| if \|\[rq]
or
.B ie
to check whether GNU
.I troff \" GNU
is the formatter.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.height]
Interpolate the rescaled height
of the environment's selected font,
in scaled points.
.
It is zero if the font height is not rescaled.
.
See
.BR \[rs]H .
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.hla]
Interpolate hyphenation language of the environment.
.
This is a string-valued register.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.hlc]
Interpolate count of immediately preceding consecutive hyphenated lines
in the environment.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.hlm]
Interpolate maximum number of consecutive hyphenated lines allowed in
the environment.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.hy]
Interpolate automatic hyphenation mode of the environment.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.hydefault]
Interpolate hyphenation mode default of the environment.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.hym]
Inteprolate hyphenation margin of the environment.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.hys]
Interpolate hyphenation space adjustment threshold of the environment.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.in]
Interpolate indentation amount applicable to the output line pending
in the environment.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.int]
Interpolate\~1 if the text most recently formatted in the environment
was \[lq]interrupted\[rq] or continued with
.BR \[rs]c ,
0\~otherwise.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.it]
Interpolate count of input lines remaining
in the environment's pending input trap.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.itc]
Interpolate\~1 if the environment's pending input trap honors
the output line continuation escape sequence
.RB ( \[rs]c ),
0\~otherwise.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.itm]
Interpolate the name of the macro associated with the environment's
pending input trap.
.
This is a string-valued register.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.kern]
Interpolate\~1 if pairwise kerning is enabled,
0\~otherwise.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.lg]
Interpolate ligature mode.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.linetabs]
Interpolate\~1 if line-tabs mode is enabled in the environment,
0\~otherwise.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.ll]
Interpolate line length applicable to the environment's
pending output line.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.lt]
Interpolate the environment's title line length.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.m]
Interpolate name of the environment's selected stroke color.
.
This is a string-valued register.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.M]
Interpolate name of the environment's selected fill color.
.
This is a string-valued register.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.ne]
Interpolate amount of space demanded by the most recent
.B ne
request that sprang a page location trap.
.
See
.BR \[rs]n[.trunc] .
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.nm]
Interpolate\~1 if output line numbering is enabled in the environment
(even if temporarily suppressed),
0\~otherwise.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.nn]
Interpolate count of lines remaining in the environment
for which numbering is suppressed
while output line numbering is enabled.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.ns]
Interpolate\~1 if no-space mode is enabled,
0\~otherwise.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.O]
Interpolate output suppression level.
.
See
.BR \[rs]O .
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.P]
Interpolate\~1 if the current page is selected for output,
0\~otherwise.
.
See
.B \-o
command-line option to
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@ .
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.pe]
Interpolate\~1 during page ejection,
0\~otherwise.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.pn]
Interpolate next page number
(either that set by
.BR pn ,
or that of the current page plus\~1).
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.ps]
Interpolate the environment's type size in scaled points.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.psr]
Interpolate the environment's most recently requested type size
in scaled points.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.pvs]
Interpolate the environment's post-vertical line spacing amount.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.rj]
Interpolate count of input lines remaining to be right-aligned
in the environment.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.slant]
Interpolate slant in degrees of the environment's selected font.
.
See
.BR \[rs]S .
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.sr]
Interpolate the environment's most recently requested type size
in typographical points.
.
This is a string-valued register.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.ss]
.TQ
.B \[rs]n[.sss]
Interpolate values of the environment's minimum inter-word space
and supplemental inter-sentence space,
respectively,
in twelfths of the space width of the selected font.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.sty]
Interpolate the environment's selected abstract font style,
if any.
.
This is a string-valued register.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.tabs]
Interpolate the environment's tab stop settings
(if any)
in a form suitable for passage to the
.B ta
request.
.
This is a string-valued register.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.trap]
Interpolate the name of the next vertical position trap
after the vertical drawing position.
.
This is a string-valued register.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.trunc]
Interpolate amount of vertical space truncated by the most recently
sprung page location trap,
or,
if the trap was sprung by an
.B ne
request,
minus the amount of vertical motion produced by the
.B ne
request.
.
In other words,
at the point a trap is sprung,
.B \[rs]n[.trunc]
represents the difference of what the vertical position would have
been but for the trap,
and what the vertical position actually is.
.
See
.BR \[rs]n[.ne] .
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.U]
Interpolate\~1 if in unsafe mode,
0\~otherwise.
.
See
.B \-U
command-line option to
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@ .
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.vpt]
Interpolate\~1 if vertical position traps are enabled,
0\~otherwise.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.warn]
Interpolate warning mask.
.
See section \[lq]Warnings\[rq] of
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@ .
.\" TODO: Maybe move that table to groff(7).
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.x]
Interpolate major version number of the running
.I @g@troff
formatter.
.
For example,
if the version number is 1.23.0,
then
.B \[rs]n[.x]
contains\~1.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.y]
Interpolate minor version number of the running
.I @g@troff
formatter.
.
For example,
if the version number is 1.23.0,
then
.B \[rs]n[.y]
contains\~23.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.Y]
Interpolate revision number of the running
.I @g@troff
formatter.
.
For example,
if the version number is 1.23.0,
then
.B \[rs]n[.Y]
contains\~0.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[.zoom]
Interpolate magnification of the environment's selected font,
in thousandths,
or\~0 if magnification unused.
.
See
.BR fzoom .
.
.
.P
The following (writable) registers are set by the
.B psbb
request.
.
.
.TP 9n \" "\n[ury]" + 2n
.B \[rs]n[llx]
.TQ
.B \[rs]n[lly]
.TQ
.B \[rs]n[urx]
.TQ
.B \[rs]n[ury]
Interpolate the
(upper,
lower,
left,
right)
bounding box values
(in PostScript units) of the most recently processed PostScript image.
.
.
.P
The following (writable) registers are set by the
.B \[rs]w
escape sequence.
.
.
.TP 9n \" "\n[ury]" + 2n
.B \[rs]n[rst]
.TQ
.B \[rs]n[rsb]
Like
.B \[rs]n[st]
and
.BR \[rs]n[sb] ,
but taking account of the heights and depths of glyphs.
.
In other words,
these registers store the highest and lowest vertical positions attained
by the argument formatted by the
.B \[rs]w
escape sequence,
doing what AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
documented
.B \[rs]n[st]
and
.B \[rs]n[sb]
as doing.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[ssc]
The amount of
(possibly negative)
horizontal space to add to the last glyph before a subscript.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[skw]
How far to right of the center of the last glyph in the
.B \[rs]w
argument,
to place the center of an accent from a roman font over that glyph.
.
.
.P
Other writable registers are as follows.
.
Those relating to date and time are initialized using
.MR localtime 3
at formatter startup.
.
.
.\" The `c.` register was documented in the January 1981 "Addendum to
.\" the Nroff/Troff User's Manual" (presumably by Kernighan), and is
.\" widely supported by descendants of his device-independent troff, but
.\" appears to have been overlooked in his 1992 revision of CSTR #54.
.TP 12n
.B \[rs]n[c.]
Interpolate input line number.
.
.B \[rs]n[.c]
is a read-only alias of this register.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[hours]
Interpolate number of hours elapsed since midnight.
.
.
.TP
.\" The `hp` register was documented in the original 1976 Ossanna troff
.\" "Nroff/Troff User's Manual" and in the January 1981 "Addendum to
.\" the Nroff/Troff User's Manual" (presumably by Kernighan), and is
.\" widely supported by descendants of his device-independent troff, but
.\" appears to have been overlooked in his 1992 revision of CSTR #54.
.B \[rs]n[hp]
Interpolate horizontal position relative to that at the start of the
input line.
.
.
.br
.ne 3v
.TP
.B \[rs]n[lsn]
.TQ
.B \[rs]n[lss]
Interpolate count of leading spaces on input line and amount of
corresponding horizontal motion,
respectively.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[minutes]
Interpolate number of minutes elapsed in the hour.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[seconds]
Interpolate number of seconds elapsed in the minute.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[systat]
Interpolate return value of
.MR system 3
function executed by most recent
.B sy
request.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[slimit]
Interpolates maximum quantity of objects on
.IR @g@troff 's
internal input stack
(default: 1000).
.
If non-positive,
there is no limit:
recursion can continue until program memory is exhausted.
.
.
.TP
.B \[rs]n[year]
Interpolate Gregorian year.
.
AT&T
.IR troff 's \" AT&T
.B \[rs]n[yr]
interpolates the Gregorian year minus 1900.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Delimiters
.\" ====================================================================
.\" BEGIN Keep (roughly) parallel with relevant material from groff.texi
.\" node "Compatibility Mode".
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
recognized slightly varying sets of delimiters when expecting
numerical expressions
(as with the
.B \[rs]h
escape sequence),
string expressions
(as with the
.B \[rs]w
escape sequence
and
.B tl
request),
and output comparisons
(as in
.RB \[lq] ".if #foo#bar# .tm match" \[rq]).
GNU
.IR troff , \" GNU
when not in compatibility mode,
recognizes a single consistent set of delimiters.
.
Compatibility mode
emulates
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
only up to a point.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
accepts leaders and tabs as delimiters,
as well as
Control+D
(EOT or EOF),
Control+H
(BS or backspace),
and
Control+L
(FF or form feed),
all of which,
when used as delimiters,
cause
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
to behave in ways difficult to predict.
.\" END Keep (roughly) parallel with relevant material from groff.texi
.\" node "Compatibility Mode".
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Miscellaneous
.\" ====================================================================
.
A font not listed in the output device's
.I DESC
file's
.B fonts
directive is automatically mounted at the next available font position
when it is selected.
.
If you mount a font explicitly with the
.B fp
request,
you should do so on the first unused position,
which can be found in the
.B .fp
register.
.
.
.P
Unparameterized string interpolation does not conceal the arguments to a
macro being interpreted.
.
Thus,
in a macro definition,
the call of another macro with the existing argument list,
.
.RS
.EX
.BI . xx\~ \[rs]\[rs]$@
.EE
.RE
.
is more efficiently done with
.
.RS
.EX
.BI \[rs]\[rs]*[ xx ]\[rs]\[rs]
.EE
.RE
.
(that is,
with string interpolation).
.
The trailing backslashes prevent the final newline in the macro
definition from being interpolated,
potentially putting an unwanted blank line on the output.
.
See section \[lq]Punning Names\[rq] in
.MR groff @MAN7EXT@ .
.
.
.\" XXX: Is this really not an AT&T troff feature?
.br
.ne 2v
.P
If a font description file contains pairwise kerning information,
glyphs from that font are kerned.
.
Kerning between two glyphs can be inhibited by placing a dummy character
.B \[rs]&
between them.
.
.
.P
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
keeps track of the nesting depth of escape sequence
interpolations and other uses of delimiters,
as in the
.B tl
request and the output comparison operator
(that is,
input like
.B \[aq]foo\[aq]bar\[aq]
as a conditional expression),
so the only characters you need to avoid using as
delimiters are those that appear in the arguments you input,
not any that result from interpolation.
.
Typically,
.B \[aq]
works fine.
.
Use visible characters as delimiters in GNU
.IR troff , \" GNU
not US-ASCII controls like BEL (Control+G).
.
The implementation of
.B \[rs]$@
ensures that the double quotes surrounding an argument appear at an
interpolation depth different from that of the arguments themselves.
.
Similarly,
in bracket-form escape sequences like
.B \[rs]f\^[ZCMI],
a right bracket
.B ]
does not end the sequence unless it occurs at the same interpolation
depth as the
.RB opening\~ [ .
.
In compatibility mode,
no attention is paid to the interpolation depth.
.
.
.P
In
GNU
.IR troff , \" GNU
the
.B tr
request can map characters to the unbreakable space escape sequence
.B \[rs]\[ti]
as a special case
.RB ( tr
normally operates only on
.IR characters ).
.
This feature replaces the odd-parity
.B tr
mapping trick used in AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
documents,
where a character,
often
.BR \[ti] ,
was \[lq]sacrificed\[rq] by mapping it to \[lq]nothing\[rq],
drafting it into use as an unadjustable,
unbreakable space.
.
(This feature was gratuitous even in early AT&T
.I troff, \" AT&T
which supported the
.BI \[rs] space
escape sequence by 1976.) \" see CSTR #54 of that year
.
Often,
it makes more sense to use
GNU
.IR troff 's \" GNU
.B \[rs]\[ti]
escape sequence instead,
which has been adopted by every other active
.I troff
implementation except that of Illumos,
as well as by the
.RI non -troff
.IR mandoc .
.
Translation of a character to
.B \[rs]\[ti]
is generally unnecessary,
but might be employed to obtain an unbreakable space when the escape
character will subsequently be disabled.
.
.
.P
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
permits tabs and spaces after the first dot on a control line that ends
a macro definition.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Formatter output"
.\" ====================================================================
.
The page description language output by GNU
.I troff \" GNU
is modeled after that used by AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
once the latter adopted a device-independent approach in the early
1980s.
.
Only the differences are documented here.
.
For a fuller discussion,
see
.MR groff_out @MAN5EXT@ .
.\"
.\"
.\" XXX: This feature is unused and documenting it gives a valuable
.\" hostage to fortune.
.\".P
.\"Note that single characters can have the eighth bit set, as can the
.\"names of fonts and special characters.
.
.
.br
.ne 3v
.P
Glyph and font names can be of arbitrary length;
postprocessors should not assume that they are at most two characters.
.
A glyph to be formatted is always drawn from the current font;
in contrast to AT&T device-independent
.IR troff , \" AT&T
drivers need not search special fonts to find a glyph.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS Units
.\" ====================================================================
.
The argument to the
.BR s \~command
is in scaled points
(units of
.RI points/ n ,
where
.I n
is the argument to the
.B sizescale
command in the
.I DESC
file).
.
The argument to the
.RB \[lq] "x H" \[rq]
command is also in scaled points.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Simple commands"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.\" BEGIN Keep in sync with relevant portions of section "Simple
.\" commands" from groff_out(5).
.P
If the
.B tcommand
directive is present in the output device's
.I DESC
file,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
employs the following two commands.
.
.
.TP
.BI t\~ xyz\c
\&.\|.\|.
Typeset word
.IR xyz ;
that is,
set a sequence of ordinary glyphs named
.IR x ,
.IR y ,
.IR z ,
\&.\|.\|.\|,
terminated by a space or newline;
an optional second integer argument is ignored
(this allows the formatter to generate an even number of arguments).
.\" XXX: Why?
.
Each glyph is set at the current drawing position,
and the position is then advanced horizontally by the glyph's width.
.
A glyph's width is read from its metrics in the font description file,
scaled to the current type size,
and rounded to a multiple of the horizontal motion quantum.
.
Use the
.B C
command to emplace glyphs of special characters.
.
.
.TP
.BI u\~ "n xyz"\c
\&.\|.\|.
Typeset word
.I xyz
with track kerning.
.
As
.BR t ,
but after placing each glyph,
the drawing position is further advanced horizontally
.RI by\~ n
basic units.
.\" END Keep in sync with relevant portions of section "Simple commands"
.\" from groff_out(5).
.
.
.P
New commands implement color support.
.
.
.TP
.BI mc\~ "cyan magenta yellow"
.TQ
.B md
.TQ
.BI mg\~ gray
.TQ
.BI mk\~ "cyan magenta yellow black"
.TQ
.BI mr\~ "red green blue"
Set the components of the stroke color with respect to various color
spaces.
.
.B md
resets the stroke color to the default value.
.
The arguments are integers in the range 0 to 65535.
.
.
.P
A new device control subcommand is available.
.
.
.TP
.BI "x u\~" n
If
.I n
is\~1,
start underlining of spaces.
.
If
.I n
is\~0,
stop underlining of spaces.
.
This facility is needed for the
.B cu
request in
.I nroff \" mode
mode and is ignored otherwise.
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Extended drawing commands"
.\" ====================================================================
.
GNU
.I pic \" GNU
does not produce
.I @g@troff
escape sequences employing these extensions if its
.B \-n
option is given.
.
.
.TP 8n \" "DE h v" + 2n
.BI Df\~ n
Set the shade of gray used to fill geometric objects to
.IR n ,
which must be an integer.
.
0 corresponds to white and 1000 to black.
.
A grayscale ramp spans the two.
.
A value outside this range uses the stroke color as the fill color.
.
The fill color is opaque.
.
Normally the default is black,
but some drivers may provide a way of changing this.
.
.B Df
is obsolete since 2002, \" commit ea5a42d080, 2002-01-24
superseded by
.B DFg
below.
.
.
.IP
The corresponding
.B \[rs]D\[aq]f\^\[aq]
escape sequence should not be used:
its argument is rounded to an integer multiple of the horizontal motion
quantum,
which can limit the precision
.RI of\~ n .
.
.
.TP
.BI DC\~ d
Draw a filled circle of diameter
.I d
with its leftmost point at the drawing position.
.
.
.TP
.BI DE\~ "h v"
Draw a filled ellipse,
of horizontal axis
.I h
and vertical axis
.IR v ,
with its leftmost point at the drawing position.
.
.
.br
.ne 4v
.EQ
delim $$
.EN
.TP
.\" `BR`, not `BI`, here, because eqn will take care of font changes.
.BR Dp\~ "$dx sub 1 ~ dy sub 1 ~ ldots ~ dx sub n ~ dy sub n$"
Draw a polygon with,
for $i = 1 , ldots , n + 1$,
its
.IR i th
vertex at the drawing position
.
$+ sum from { j = 1 } to { i - 1 } ( dx sub j , dy sub j )$.
.
.\" The following is implied by the math above, but let's be kind.
.I groff
output drivers automatically close polygons,
drawing a line from $( dx sub n , dy sub n )$ back to
$( dx sub 1 , dy sub 1 )$.
.
The drawing position is left at the last
.I specified
vertex,
but this may change in a future version of GNU
.IR troff . \" GNU
.
Heirloom Doctools
.IR troff , \" Heirloom
like DWB
.IR troff , \" DWB
by default does not close the polygon.
.
In its
.I groff
compatibility mode,
Heirloom closes the polygon but leaves the drawing position
.IR unchanged \[em]that
is,
at the polygon's
.I initial
drawing position.
.
.
.TP
.BR DP\~ "$dx sub 1 ~ dy sub 1 ~ ldots ~ dx sub n ~ dy sub n$"
As
.BR Dp ,
but draw a filled rather than a stroked polygon.
.
.
.TP
.BI Dt\~ n
Set the line thickness to
.IR n \~\c
basic units.
.
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
output drivers use a thickness proportional to the type size;
this is the GNU
.I troff \" GNU
default.
.
A
.RI negative\~ n
requests this explicitly.
.
.RI An\~ n
of zero selects the smallest available line thickness.
.
.
.P
A difficulty arises in how the drawing position should be changed after
the execution of these commands.
.
This has little importance to most users,
since the output of GNU
.I grn \" GNU
and
.I pic \" GNU
does not depend on it.
.
Given a drawing command of the form
.BI D z
$x sub 1 ~ y sub 1 ~ ldots ~ x sub n ~ y sub n$,
where
.I z
is not
.B c
or
.BR e ,
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
treats each $x sub i$ as a horizontal motion,
each $y sub i$ as a vertical one,
and therefore assumes that the width of the drawn object is
$sum from { i = 1 } to n x sub i$,
and its height is $sum from { i = 1 } to n y sub i$.
.
(Verify its assumption about height by examining the
.B st
and
.B sb
registers after using such a drawing command in a
.B \[rs]w
escape sequence).
.
Thus after executing a
.BR D \~command
of the form
.BI D z
$x sub 1 ~ y sub 1 ~ ldots ~ x sub n ~ y sub n$,
the drawing position increases by
.
$( sum from { i = 1 } to n x sub i , sum from { i = 1 } to n y sub i )$.
.EQ
delim off
.EN
.
For the sake of compatibility,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
follows this rule,
even though it frustrates extensions to the
.B D
command that set drawing parameters rather than rendering objects,
producing ugly results in the case of
.B Dt
and
.BR Df ,
or otherwise don't parameterize objects as a series of vertices,
as with
GNU
.IR troff 's \" GNU
filled ellipse,
.BR DE .
.
In a future release,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
and its output drivers may abandon the application of this assumption to
drawing commands not explicitly specified in the AT&T \[lq]Troff User's
Manual\[rq].
.
You can ensure predictable output by enclosing drawing commands
in the zero-motion escape sequence
.BR \[rs]Z .
.
.
.P
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
implements fill color selection with another set of extensions.
.
.
.TP
.BI DFc\~ "cyan magenta yellow"
.TQ
.B DFd
.TQ
.BI DFg\~ gray
.TQ
.BI DFk\~ "cyan magenta yellow black"
.TQ
.BI DFr\~ "red green blue"
Set the components of the fill color as described under the
.B \[rs]M
escape sequence above.
.
.B DFd
restores the device's default fill color.
.
The drawing position is not updated,
in contrast to
.BR Df .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Device control syntax extension"
.\" ====================================================================
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
introduces a line continuation convention,
permitting the argument to the
.B x X
command to contain newlines.
.
A newline in the input is transformed to the sequence
.RI \[lq] newline\c
.BR + \[rq].
.
When interpreting an
.B x X
command,
a postprocessor should therefore be prepared for a plus sign after a
newline;
if it occurs,
preserve the newline,
discard the plus sign,
and continue to collect the input into the argument of the
.B x X
command.
.
A newline
.I not
followed by a plus sign terminates the
.B x X
command.
.
An application of this feature is the embedding of PostScript or PDF
language command streams into
.I troff \"
output.
.
.
.P
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
guarantees that the first three output commands it emits are as follows.
.
.
.P
.RS
.EX
.RI x\~T\~ device
.RI x\~res\~ n\~h\~v
x init
.EE
.RE
.
.
.br
.ne 4v
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Debugging
.\" ====================================================================
.
In addition to AT&T
.IR troff 's \" AT&T
debugging features,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
emits more error diagnostics when syntactical or semantic nonsense is
encountered and supports several warning categories;
the output of these can be selected with
.RB \[lq] warn \[rq].
.
Also see the
.BR \-E ,
.BR \-w ,
and
.B \-W
options of
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@ .
.
.
.\" BEGIN Keep (roughly) parallel with relevant material from groff.texi
.\" node "Debugging".
.P
A trace of the formatter's input processing stack
can be emitted when errors or warnings occur
by means of
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
.B \-b
option,
or produced on demand with the
.B \%backtrace
request.
.\" END Keep (roughly) parallel with relevant material from groff.texi
.\" node "Debugging".
.
.
.br
.ne 2v
.P
.I groff
also adds more flexible diagnostic output requests
.RB ( tmc
and
.BR tm1 ).
.
.\" BEGIN Keep (roughly) parallel with relevant material from groff.texi
.\" node "Debugging".
Examine the state of the formatter with requests that write lists of
.\" Deliberate desync with Texinfo: this is groff_diff(7); AT&T troff
.\" already had `pm`.
defined \" names---macros, strings, and diversions---
colors
.RB ( pcolor ),
composite character mappings
.RB ( pcomposite ),
environments
.RB ( pev ),
font translations
.RB ( pftr ),
automatic hyphenation codes
.RB ( pchar )
and exceptions
.RB ( phw ),
registers
.RB ( pnr ),
open streams
.RB ( pstream ),
and
page location traps
.RB ( ptr ).
.
Requests can also disclose
to the standard error stream
the internal properties and representations of
characters and classes
.RB ( pchar ),
macros
(and strings and diversions)
.RB ( pm ),
and the list of output nodes corresponding to the pending input line
.RB ( pline ).
.\" END Keep (roughly) parallel with relevant material from groff.texi
.\" node "Debugging".
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Compatibility mode"
.\" ====================================================================
.
Some syntactical and behavioral differences between AT&T and GNU
.IR troff s \" generic
are thought too important to neglect;
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
therefore makes available a
.I "compatibility mode"
in an effort to keep documents prepared for AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
rendering well.
.
.
.P
Identifiers of arbitrary length may be
GNU
.IR troff 's \" GNU
most obvious innovation.
.
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
interprets
.RB \[lq] .dsabcd \[rq]
as defining a string
.RB \[lq] ab \[rq]
with contents
.RB \[lq] cd \[rq].
.
Normally,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
interprets this input as calling a macro named
.RB \[lq] dsabcd \[rq].
.
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
also interprets
.B \[rs]*[
and
.B \[rs]n[
as interpolating a string or register,
respectively,
named
.RB \[lq] [ \[rq].
.
GNU
.IR troff , \" GNU
however,
normally interprets
.RB \[lq] [ \[rq]
as bracketing a long name
(with
.RB \[lq] ] \[rq]
at the distal end).
.
In compatibility mode,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
interprets names in the traditional way,
they thus can be two characters long at most.
.
See the
.B \-C
option in
.MR @g@troff @MAN1EXT@
and,
above,
the
.B .C
and
.B .cp
registers,
and
.B cp
and
.RB \[lq] do \[rq]
requests,
for more on compatibility mode.
.
.
.br
.ne 2v
.P
The register
.B \[rs]n[.cp]
is specialized and may require a statement of rationale.
.
When writing macro packages or documents that use GNU
.I troff \" GNU
features and which may be mixed with other packages or documents that do
not\[em]common scenarios include serial processing of man pages or use
of the
.RB \[lq] so \[rq]
or
.B mso
requests\[em]you may desire correct operation regardless of
compatibility mode enablement in the surrounding context.
.
It may occur to you to save the existing value of
.B \[rs]n(.C
into a register,
say,
.BR _C ,
at the beginning of your file,
turn compatibility mode off with
.RB \[lq] .cp\~0 \[rq],
then restore it from that register at the end with
.RB \[lq] .cp\~\[rs]n(_C \[rq].
.
At the same time,
a modular design of a document or macro package may lead you to multiple
layers of inclusion.
.
You cannot use the same register name everywhere lest you
\[lq]clobber\[rq] the value from a preceding or enclosing context.
.
The two-character register name space of AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
is confining,
but employing
GNU
.IR troff 's \" GNU
more capacious one,
as with
.RB \[lq] ".nr _my_saved_C \[rs]n(.C" \[rq]
does not work in compatibility mode;
the register name is too long.
.
Employing the
.RB \[lq] do \[rq]
request is no help:
.RB \[lq] ".do nr _my_saved_C \[rs]n(.C" \[rq]
always saves zero to the register,
because
.RB \[lq] do \[rq]
turns compatibility mode
.I off
while it interprets its argument list.
.
.
.P
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
normally tracks the interpolation depth of escape sequence parameters
and other delimited structures,
but not in compatibility mode.
.
See section \[lq]Miscellaneous\[rq] above.
.
.
.P
The escape sequences
.BR \[rs]f ,
.BR \[rs]H ,
.BR \[rs]m ,
.BR \[rs]M ,
.BR \[rs]R ,
.BR \[rs]s ,
and
.B \[rs]S
are transparent to control character recognition
at the beginning of an input line,
or after the conditional expression of an
.RB \[lq] if \^\[rq]
or
.B ie
request,
only in compatibility mode.
.
That is,
upon interpreting them,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
normally no longer recognizes a control character on the input line;
but in compatibility mode,
it does,
just like AT&T
.I troff. \" AT&T
.
.
.P
Normally,
the syntax form
.BI \[rs]s n
accepts only a single character
(a digit)
for
.IR n ,
consistently with other forms that originated in AT&T
.IR troff , \" AT&T
like
.BR \[rs]* ,
.BR \[rs]$ ,
.BR \[rs]f ,
.BR \[rs]g ,
.BR \[rs]k ,
.BR \[rs]n ,
and
.BR \[rs]z .
.
In compatibility mode only,
a
.RI non-zero\~ n
must be in the range 4\[en]39.
.
Legacy documents relying upon this quirk of parsing should migrate
to another
.B \[rs]s
form.
.
[Background:
The Graphic Systems C/A/T phototypesetter
(the original device target for AT&T
.IR troff ) \" AT&T
supported only a few discrete type sizes in the range 6\[en]36 points,
so Ossanna contrived a special case in the parser to do what the user
must have meant.
.
Kernighan warned of this in the 1992 revision of CSTR\~#54 (\[sc]2.3),
and more recently,
McIlroy referred to it as a \[lq]living fossil\[rq].]
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "Other differences"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.\" BEGIN Keep in sync with groff.texi node "Other Differences".
Use of C0 control characters in identifiers is not portable;
Solaris,
Plan\~9,
and Heirloom Doctools
.IR troff s \" Solaris, Plan 9, Heirloom
accept
Control+B,
Control+C,
Control+E,
Control+F,
and
Control+G (only);
DWB\~3.3
.I troff \" DWB
does not.
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
rejects C0 controls in identifiers with an error diagnostic.
.
.
.P
Formatters that don't implement
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
extension request names
tend to ignore them,
and if they don't support a
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
extension escape sequence,
they are liable to format its function selector character as text.
.
For example,
.\" NESTED BEGIN Keep in sync with groff_man_style(7).
the adjustable,
non-breaking space escape sequence
.B \[rs]\[ti]
is also supported by Heirloom Doctools
.I troff \" Heirloom
050915 (September 2005),
.I mandoc
1.9.5 (2009-09-21),
.I neatroff
(commit 1c6ab0f6e,
2016-09-13),
and Plan\~9 from User Space
.I troff \" Plan 9
(commit 93f8143600,
2022-08-12),
but not by Solaris
or Documenter's Workbench
.IR troff s, \" DWB, Solaris
which both render it as
.RB \[lq] \[ti] \[rq].
.\" as of this writing, 2022-08-13
.\" NESTED END Keep in sync with groff_man_style(7).
.
The
.B \[rs]A
escape sequence
(see subsection \[lq]Escape sequences\[rq] above)
may be helpful in avoiding their use.
.
.
.P
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
discards trailing spaces from input lines,
like GNU
.IR troff , \" GNU
but when it does so,
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
also cancels end-of-sentence detection.
.
Use of the dummy character escape sequence
.B \[rs]&
is more portable.
.
.
.P
When adjusting output lines to both margins,
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
at first adjusts spaces starting from the right;
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
begins from the left.
.
Both implementations adjust spaces
from opposite ends on alternating output lines
in this adjustment mode
to prevent \[lq]rivers\[rq] in the text.
.
.
.br
.ne 2v
.P
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
does not always hyphenate words as AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
does.
.
The AT&T implementation uses a set of hard-coded rules
specific to U.S.\& English,
while GNU
.I troff \" GNU
uses language-specific hyphenation pattern files derived from \*[tx].
.
Some versions of
.I troff \" generic
reserved meager storage for hyphenation exception words
(arguments to the
.B hw
request);
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
has no such restriction.
.
When the
.B hy
request is invoked without an argument,
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
sets the automatic hyphenation mode to the value of the
.B \%.hydefault
register;
the AT&T implementation sets it to
.RB \[lq] 1 \[rq],
which is not suitable in GNU
.I troff \" GNU
for some languages,
including English.
.
.
.P
Unlike
GNU
.IR troff , \" GNU
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
does not recognize an occurrence of
.B \[rs]%
at the beginning of a word as suppressing its hyphenation;
instead,
it (uselessly) marks the start of the word
as a potential hyphenation point,
permitting output lines to end with hyphens
that are not interior to a word.
.
.
.P
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
handles the dummy character
.B \[rs]&
differently from AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
when it is followed by the hyphenation control escape sequence
.B \[rs]%
at the beginning of a word.
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
does not regard the dummy character as \[lq]starting\[rq] the word;
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
does.
.
Further,
Heirloom Doctools
.I troff \" Heirloom
does not honor an explicit hyphenation point marked with
.B \[rs]%
after a word-initial one.
.\" The foregoing observations may have the same cause.
.
.
.P
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
interprets request arguments representing file names
and system commands
in the same way it does the
.I contents
argument to the
.B ds
and
.RB \[lq] as \[rq]
requests:
it removes a leading neutral double quote
.RB \[oq] \[dq] \[cq]
from the argument to the
.BR cf ,
.BR nx ,
.BR pi ,
.RB \[lq] so \[rq],
and
.B sy
requests,
and the second argument
(if present)
to the
.B lf
request,
permitting initial embedded spaces in it,
and reads it to the end of the input line in copy mode.
This difference permits the formatter to handle files
with spaces in their names,
but requires more care with trailing comments,
and doubling of an initial neutral double quote
.RB \[lq] \[dq] \[rq]
if the file name has one.
.
.
.P
The existence of the
.B .T
string is a common feature of device-independent
.IR troff s\[em]DWB\~3.3, \" others
Solaris,
Heirloom Doctools,
and Plan\~9
.I troff \" foreign
all support it\[em]but valid values are specific to each implementation.
.
.
.P
The (read-only) register
.B .T
interpolates\~1
if GNU
.I troff \" GNU
is run with the
.B \-T
option,
and\~0 otherwise.
In contrast,
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
interpolated\~1 only if
.I nroff \" AT&T
was the formatter and was run with
.BR \-T .
.
.
.P
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
ignored attempts to remove read-only registers;
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
honors such requests.
.
.
.P
The
.B lf
request sets the number of the
.I current
input line in AT&T
.IR troff ,\" AT&T
and the
.I next
in GNU
.IR troff .\" GNU
.
.
.br
.ne 2v
.P
AT&T
.I troff
had only environments named
.RB \[lq] 0 \[rq],
.RB \[lq] 1 \[rq],
and
.RB \[lq] 2 \[rq].
.
In GNU
.IR troff ,
any number of environments may exist,
using any valid identifiers for their names.
.
.
.P
As noted above in \[lq]Fractional type sizes and new scaling units\[rq],
AT&T
.IR troff 's \" AT&T
.B ps
request ignores scaling units
and thus
.RB \[lq] .ps\~10u \[rq]
sets the type size to 10\~points,
whereas in GNU
.I troff \" GNU
it sets the type size to
.RI 10\~ scaled
points,
possibly a much smaller measurement.
.
AT&T's behavior also means that
.RB \[lq] .ps\~10p \[rq]
and
.RB \[lq] .ps\~10z \[rq]
are portable.
.
.
.P
The
.B ab
request differs from AT&T
.IR troff : \" AT&T
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
writes no message to the standard error stream if no arguments are
given,
and it exits with a failure status instead of a successful one.
.
.
.P
The
.B bp
request differs from AT&T
.IR troff : \" AT&T
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
does not accept a scaling unit on the argument,
a page number;
the former does (uselessly).
.
.
.P
In AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
the
.B pm
request reports
macro,
string,
and
diversion
sizes in units of 128-byte blocks,
and an argument reduces the report to a sum of the above in the same
units.
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
reports their lengths in characters or nodes if given no arguments,
and otherwise dumps
the JSON-encoded name,
contents,
and other properties of each named argument.
.
.
.P
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
ignores the
.B ss
request if the output is a terminal device;
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
rounds down the values of minimum inter-word and additional
inter-sentence space each to the nearest multiple of\~12.
.
.
.\" TODO: A lot of this discussion should move to "Using Symbols" and
.\" "Gtroff Internals" (or whatever those sections get named once ported
.\" to this man page).
.P
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
distinguishes characters from glyphs.
.
Characters can be ordinary,
special,
or indexed,
and populate strings and macros.
.
Characters
.I "per se"
have not (yet) been formatted.
.
Glyphs represent graphemes
(supplied by the output device)
and populate diversions.
.\" (recall @ref{Diversions}).
.
Formatting converts characters into
(sequences of)
glyphs.
.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
stores properties of the environment
that affect how a glyph is rendered with the glyph node's data.
.
Thus,
subsequent formatting operations do not affect it,
including
.BR bd ,
.BR cs ,
.BR tkf ,
.BR tr ,
and
.B fp
requests.
.
Normally,
a macro or string
contains only a list of characters
and a diversion
contains only a list of nodes.
However,
applying the
.B \%asciify
or
.B \%unformat
requests to a diversion converts some of its nodes back into characters.
.
Where the formatter cannot recover the character representation
of a node,
it stores a null character in the character list
corresponding to a single node in the node list.
.
Consequently,
a glyph node does not behave as a character does
in macro interpolation:
it does not inherit special properties
that the character from which it was constructed might have had.
.
.
.P
One way to format a backslash in most documents is with the
.B \[rs]e
escape sequence;
this formats the glyph of the current escape character,
regardless of whether it is used in a diversion;
it also works in both GNU
.I troff \" GNU
and AT&T
.IR troff . \" AT&T
.
(Naturally,
if you've changed the escape character,
you need to prefix the
.RB \[lq] e \[rq]
with whatever it is\[em]and you'll likely get something other than a
backslash in the output.)
.
.
.P
The other correct way,
appropriate in contexts independent of the backslash's common use as a
.I roff
escape character\[em]perhaps in discussion of character sets or other
programming languages\[em]is the special character escape sequence
.B \[rs](rs
or
.BR \[rs][rs] ,
for \[lq]reverse solidus\[rq],
from its name in the ECMA-6 and ISO\~10646 standards.
.
[AT&T
.I troff 's \" AT&T
font description files
did not define the
.B rs
special character,
but those of
its descendant Heirloom Doctools
.I troff \" Heirloom
do,
as of its 060716 release (July 2006).]
.\" The foregoing once said "lineal" descendant; that appears not to be
.\" true.  Heirloom Doctools troff is based on Open Solaris troff, which
.\" descends from DWB 2.0 troff (effectively a fork).  "Lineal"
.\" descendants of DWB 2.0 troff would be DWB 3.3 and, possibly, Plan 9
.\" troff.  (The accuracy of this last claim depends on the degree of
.\" resemblance between Research Unix troff--the version maintained by
.\" Kernighan--and DWB troff, of which 3.4 was the final release.)
.
.
.P
To store an escape sequence in a diversion that is interpreted when the
diversion is interpolated,
either use the traditional
.B \[rs]!\&
transparent output facility,
or,
if this is unsuitable,
the new
.B \[rs]?\&
escape sequence.
.
See subsection \[lq]Escape sequences\[rq] above and sections
\[lq]Diversions\[rq] and \[lq]Gtroff Internals\[rq] in
.IR "Groff: The GNU Implementation of troff" ,
the
.I groff
Texinfo manual.
.
.
.P
Like
AT&T
.I troff, \" AT&T
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
maintains a buffer of device-independent output commands,
populating the buffer as formatted output accumulates.
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
always flushes this buffer when processing a break;
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
does so according to no obvious schedule
(perhaps,
if the buffer is of fixed size,
the formatter performs the flush when the buffer runs out of room).
.
.
.P
In the somewhat pathological case where a diversion exists
containing a partially collected line
and a partially collected line at the top-level diversion
has never existed,
AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
outputs a partially collected but otherwise empty line
(as if
.RB \[lq] \[rs]c \[rq]
were in the top-level diversion)
at the end of input;
GNU
.I troff \" GNU
does not.
.\" END Keep in sync with groff.texi node "Other Differences".
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SS "Formatter output incompatibilities"
.\" ====================================================================
.
Its extensions notwithstanding,
GNU
.IR troff 's \" GNU
page description language
has some incompatibilities with that of AT&T
.IR troff , \" AT&T
but better compatibility is sought;
problem reports and patches are welcome.
.
The following incompatibilities are known.
.
.
.IP \[bu] 3n
The drawing position after rendering polygons is inconsistent with AT&T
.I troff \" AT&T
practice.
.
Other implementations have diverged on this point as well.
.
.
.IP \[bu]
The output cannot be easily rescaled to other devices as AT&T
.IR troff 's \" AT&T
could.
.\" XXX: Why?  What's the problem?  sizescale?  That could be written
.\" into the output as a comment or x command.  --GBR
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH Authors
.\" ====================================================================
.
This document was written by
.MT jjc@\:jclark\:.com
James Clark
.ME ,
.MT wl@\:gnu\:.org
Werner Lemberg
.ME ,
.MT groff\-bernd\:.warken\-72@\:web\:.de
Bernd Warken
.ME ,
and
.MT g.branden\:.robinson@\:gmail\:.com
G.\& Branden Robinson
.ME .
.
.
.\" ====================================================================
.SH "See also"
.\" ====================================================================
.
.IR "Groff: The GNU Implementation of troff" ,
by Trent A.\& Fisher and Werner Lemberg,
is the primary
.I groff
manual.
.
You can browse it interactively with \[lq]info groff\[rq].
.
.
.br
.ne 4v
.P
\[lq]Troff User's Manual\[rq]
by Joseph F.\& Ossanna,
1976
(revised by Brian W.\& Kernighan,
1992),
AT&T Bell Laboratories Computing Science Technical Report No.\& 54,
widely called simply \[lq]CSTR\~#54\[rq],
documents the language,
device and font description file formats,
and page description language
referred to collectively in
.I groff
documentation as AT&T
.IR troff . \" AT&T
.
.
.P
\[lq]A Typesetter-independent TROFF\[rq]
by Brian W.\& Kernighan,
1982,
AT&T Bell Laboratories Computing Science Technical Report No.\& 97,
provides additional insights into the
device and font description file formats
and page description language.
.
.
.P
.MR groff @MAN1EXT@ ,
.MR groff @MAN7EXT@ ,
.MR roff @MAN7EXT@
.
.
.\" Clean up.
.rm tx
.rm ic
.
.\" Restore compatibility mode (for, e.g., Solaris 10/11).
.cp \n[*groff_groff_diff_7_man_C]
.do rr *groff_groff_diff_7_man_C
.
.
.\" Local Variables:
.\" fill-column: 72
.\" mode: nroff
.\" End:
.\" vim: set filetype=groff textwidth=72:
